199Shadowrun, Third Edition
he Matrix is an interlocking system of computers, called hosts, linked together by grids—
the world telecommunications network. Most computer systems throughout the world are
accessible via the Matrix, assuming you have authorized passcodes or can hack your way
in. A Matrix user can theoretically connect to a host on the other side of the planet with-
in seconds. This degree of connectivity is required both by the laws of the corporate world and
by the absolute necessity of keeping data current in a time when profound changes can occur
in the blink of an eye.
The human mind cannot directly comprehend the flow of data in the Matrix. If users were
restricted to old-tech tools—command lines, file names, programs in clumsy procedural lan-
guages—the system would be unmanageable. For example, a user who wanted to read a com-
puter file in 1998 would type in some wearisome command, find the file in a window, or access
the desired information in some other, equally clumsy method. But after the Crash of 2029,
Artificial Sensory Induction System Technology, (ASIST), opened up the possibilities of actual
DNI (Direct Neural Interface) access to computers, and the Matrix was born. Everything in the
Matrix—physical components, programs, even actions such as copying a file—is graphically
represented by an 
icon. Now, the user takes a microsecond-long trip through a computer-gen-
erated landscape in order to find a file. If the user is validated to see a file, he finds it right where
he expects to find it. The interface routines he uses may look like clerical workers, or a huge
library, or simply appear as dazzling patterns of energy. The user sees the file, touches it, and
the data downloads into his cyberterminal.
Users no longer need to remember codes, command sets, or file names. If they want
something, they go get it. If they want to program a process for the laboratory or an assembly
line, they mentally perform the motions involved or build a model using virtual components,
and the computer learns from them. Modern chemists, for example, build molecules accord-
ing to formulae as if they were using children’s building blocks. The computer then translates
these actions into a program that will operate the process in the real world.
Of course, shadowrunners who have their own reasons for being inside a computer sys-
tem can take advantage of the same technological advances. The same Matrix gear that makes
a wage slave’s job simple gives power to deckers. These renegade users can slip into a com-
puter system and use that simple graphic representation to their own end. 
MATRIX
T
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
200 Shadowrun, Third Edition
ACCESSING
THE MATRIX
To connect to the Matrix,
people use cybernetic inter-
face devices known as
cyberdecks and cybertermi-
nals. All such devices have a
fiber-optic cable with a stan-
dard data plug like those
found on home telecom sys-
tems. With the right tools, a
decker can jury-rig a place to
put that plug (see 
Jackpoints).
The deck or terminal connects
to its user either via an elec-
trode net that slips over the
head (the way of cowards), or
with a direct cybernetic inter-
face through a datajack (the
only way to fly). Some net-
heads still use some form of
keyboard assistance, but many
prefer running with a pure
cybernetic hook-up.
Once activated, the deck
or terminal overrides most of
the user’s own sensory infor-
mation and replaces it with an
electronic simulation of the
Matrix. The simsense signal
translates the complex code
structures of the actual Matrix
into graphical icons. After a
second of disorientation, the
decker (that is, the icon of the
decker character) appears in
the Matrix at the point where
the cyberdeck tapped in. If he
enters from an illegal tap in the
back room at Matchstick’s Bar
& Grill, the decker’s image will
appear in the telecom line that
serves the joint. 
Legitimate users have
registered cyberterminals that
identify themselves to the
Matrix at every step. But the
cyberdecks of deckers have no
Matrix identifiers. Deckers
remain anonymous, and when
everything goes right they can
dance through the secrets of
the Matrix, laughing at securi-
ty measures. Of course, when
things go wrong, they can die
in the Matrix as well.
JACKPOINTS
Jackpoints consist of the
physical connections deckers
use to access the Matrix.
Jackpoints normally fall into
two categories: legal and
illegal.
A legal-access jackpoint
represents access from a
legally registered telecom.
Of course, it doesn’t have to
be 
your telecom, omae.
An illegal-access jackpoint
represents access from either
an illegal telecom connection
(some unscrupulous soul has
boosted service from the
phone company) or a dataline
tap (see p. 289 in 
Street Gear),
an illegal junction box hooked
directly into a fiber-optic
trunk. The illegal-access jack-
point is the most common
jackpoint used by deckers.
Finally, you have various
jackpoints that give you
access to the Matrix but can
either be illegal or legal
depending on how the decker
gained access to those jack-
points. Examples of those are:
a workstation (i.e. a cyber-
terminal connected directly to
a host), a remote device (such
as a security terminal or vend-
ing machine) and a console
(i.e. the actual control panel
on a mainframe).
A telecom jackpoint con-
nects the decker directly to
an LTG. A workstation, con-
sole, or remote device jack-
point connects her directly to
a host. Depending on where
the fiber-optic trunk is con-
nected, an illegal junction-
box jackpoint can connect
the decker to either an LTG
or a host.
ICONS
Every object a user sees in
the Matrix is an icon. Users
have special icons called 
per-
sonas. When we talk about a
decker’s persona, we may
MATRIX JARGON
Access Control Index Files Slave (ACIFS)— The rating for-
mat used when describing the System Rating of any host.
Artificial Sensory Induction System Technology (ASIST)—
Hardware and programs that allow one to directly experi-
ence the senses of another (simsense). 
Cyberdeck— A hot microcomputer used by deckers for ille-
gal Matrix access; also used by security deckers.
Cyberterminal— A computer used for safe, legal Matrix
access and work; much slower than cyberdecks.
Decker— A hacker, an illegal user of the Matrix.
Direct Neural Interface (DNI)— The ability to interface neur-
al impulses with a computer system, thus allowing a user to
interact and control a computer system directly with his
brain. 
Grid— A series of interlocking computer systems (hosts).
Host— A single computer system.
Icon— Any object a user sees in the Matrix.
Intrusion Countermeasures (IC)— Any software program
installed in a computer system (host) with the express pur-
pose of protecting that system from unauthorized users.
Jackpoints— Any physical location that provides access to
the Matrix.
Local Telecommunication Grid (LTG) — A Grid covering a
small area (neighborhoods, cities). Numerous LTGs connect
to a single RTG. 
Matrix— The world telecommunications network.
MPCP— Master Persona Control Program, the master oper-
ating system of a cyberdeck.
Node— Part of a host, such as a subsystem, usually repre-
sented by a virtual landscape.
Persona— A deckers icon.
Persona Program— One of the four programs (Bod, Evasion,
Masking, or Sensors) that defines the personas “Attributes.”
Private Locale Telecommunication Grid (PLTG)— Any grid
which the general public cannot access.
Regional Telecommunication Grid (RTG)— The largest type
of grid, RTGs cover entire countries.
Sculpted System— Matrix hosts with detailed, non-standard
iconography, usually encompassing a particular metaphor.
Security Decker— A decker employed by a corporation or
law enforcement agency to protect certain Matrix areas from
deckers.
Simsense— Hardware and programs that enable a person to
experience the reality of what has happened to someone
else.
Subsystem— The five operational aspects of any Grid or
host, such as Access, Control, and so forth.
System Access Nodes (SANs)— The icon connection
between host computers or grids to other host computers or
grids.
Tortoise— Decker slang for cyberterminals.
Universal Matrix Standards (UMS)— The standard iconogra-
phy that is currently falling out of fashion in the Matrix.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
202 Shadowrun, Third Edition
also refer to his icon, or his on-line icon. Icons also represent pro-
grams, IC, nodes and so forth.
As real as the experience seems, a decker never physical-
ly enters the Matrix. His meatbod remains sitting where the
cyberdeck connects to the Matrix, the jackpoint. The deck
feeds the decker an ASIST signal, in the same way as a sim-
sense set, that makes him think he is somewhere else. That
somewhere else is the Matrix.
The persona programs and utilities running on the
cyberdeck are master copies of the software that make decking
possible. When a decker logs on to a grid or host, the cyberdeck
loads versions of those programs into the Matrix system. In a
nutshell, deckers deal with two sets of programs: the 
front-end
programs on the deck, which convert the decker’s neural
impulses into computer command transactions; and 
server pro-
grams in the Matrix, which convert those commands into pro-
gramming commands that influence what the system does.
These on-line servers form the decker’s persona. Through
the persona, the decker experiences the environment of the
system where he is active. The persona programs send trans-
actions back from the Matrix to the cyberdeck, where the front-
end programs convert them into simsense experiences.
This system creates two complexes: the meat decker and his
front-end programs on the deck; and the decker’s on-line icon,
which runs on the computers that create the Matrix. Disconnect
the deck, crash the persona, or sever the commlink that connects
them, and the decker is off-line, jacked out, dumped.
SEEING THE MATRIX
What does the Matrix look like? Most of it looks comput-
er-generated and -drawn no matter how astounding, even
photo-realistic, the level of detail. But it is still obviously com-
puter-created. Indeed, some sections of the Matrix are virtual-
ly indistinguishable from the real world, but those are danger-
ous places.
Everything in the Matrix has a symbolic representation.
Computer systems, when viewed from the outside, often look
like buildings, mountains, or other large-structure images.
Inside, they may use a variety of imagery to represent different
functions. Most computer systems in 2060 are custom-
designed “sculpted systems,” using detailed metaphors and
designs to represent the workings of that system. The central
metaphor of a sculpted system defines the virtual reality of that
system. For example, the Mitsuhama Pagoda contains virtual
villages where application icons toil patiently in the rice pad-
dies of a cybernetic medieval Japanese milieu, and sensitive
data is stored in castles defended by samurai IC. When on a
system, usually everything a decker does or senses is
explained in terms of the system’s central metaphor.
Data also has its own representation, as do the systems
that guard it. The data might appear as floating cubes filled
with swirling data while a giant snake (representing a scramble
security program) coils around it, awaiting an unwary intruder.
Other types of programs also have their own representations.
Logging onto a host may be presented as walking through a
doorway, or being sucked through a great neon tube.
Programs used by deckers have similar representations. An
attack program can look like anything that might deliver an
attack, from a knife to a rocket launcher. A shield program
might look like a traditional shield or perhaps an energy field
that rises up to protect the decker as needed.
And what does the decker look like? He looks like any-
thing he wants. A man wearing a suit of knightly or technolog-
ical armor, a being made of pure light, a glowing white ball, a
demon from some corner of Hell; it doesn’t matter. In the
Matrix, anything can look like anything.
This may seem odd, but remember that the images the
decker is seeing (and the sounds he hears, and so on) have no
basis in reality. These images are generated entirely by the
cyberdeck, based on information received by the computer
system with which it is interacting. The Mitsuhama system
described earlier, for example, tells the cyberdeck that it looks
like a pagoda. The scramble program transmits a little piece of
code that says it looks like a big snake. The attack program says
it looks like a big gun. And the cyberdeck tells anyone who
asks that the decker using it looks like whatever the character
has been programmed to look like.
Many programs and their icons may be hidden from a
decker. The icon is “there,” but the decker does not see it
because it is inactive or because her deck’s sensor programs are
not good enough to detect it. IC programs for example, are
often hidden or portrayed as innocuous icons, until the decker
triggers them. Deckers can also take advantage of this disguise
game, by using masking programs to make their personas invis-
ible or disguise them as authorized programs or processes.
GRIDS AND HOSTS
The Matrix consists of telecommunications networks
(grids) and computer systems (hosts). Grids carry voice and
data transmissions—everything from phone calls to faxes to
gigapulse e-mail data packets. Hosts are what used to be
called mainframe computers, but mainframes in the Sixth
World do not have to be single, powerful pieces of hardware.
In fact, many of them are linked series of massive parallel
processors in smaller configurations. These provide just as
much jam as a single supercomputer. Simply put, a host in
Shadowrun is any computer system important enough for a
decker to invade and tough enough to fight back.
In the Matrix, grids appear as vast three-dimensional
spaces—pocket universes—sparkling with the icons of numer-
ous hosts, data transmissions, deckers, and more. 
REGIONAL TELECOMMUNICATION GRIDS (RTG)
The System Ratings of the North American RTGs are listed
in the North American RTG System Ratings Table, p. 203.
When generating System Ratings (See 
Intrusion Difficulty,
p. 205) for a public grid not on the list, assume the grid has an
Intrusion Difficulty of Easy and subtract 2 from all ratings (for a
range of 6 to 8).
LOCAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS GRIDS (LTG)
When a decker first connects to the Matrix, she usually
starts with her deck loading her icon onto an LTG. LTG Ratings
are usually equal to the System Ratings for the parent RTG.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
203Shadowrun, Third Edition
PRIVATE LTGS
Private LTGs (PLTGs) are independent, restricted global
grids that are closed to the general public. Most large corpo-
rations and all megacorporations maintain at least one PLTG.
Typically, most developed countries maintain several govern-
ment PLTGs, which may extend to military or diplomatic sites
outside the countries’ borders. PLTGs are run on dedicated
fiber-optic lines, owned by the agency using them or leased
from the local phone company.
PLTGs are governed by the laws of the corp or country that
owns them. As a result, PLTG owners can install any anti-intru-
sion measures they desire. Because building a PLTG requires a
considerable investment, most owners don’t skimp on the IC.
When assigning System Ratings to a custom-designed
PLTG, the gamemaster should consider using Orange or Red
security codes and Intrusion Difficulties of Easy, as described in
Intrusion Difficulty, p. 205.
Regulations and Entry Points
Corporate PLTGs span the globe. For example, a specific
LTG can connect corporate host computers all over the world.
PLTGs may support multiple entry points connecting them to
different public grids. Deckers may gain access to a PLTG
through any of its entry points, or by entering a host connect-
ed to the PLTG.
However, many countries strictly regulate the operation of
PLTGs within their public grids, despite corporate pressure to
deregulate all international PLTG access.
In general, PLTG regulations are politically motivated and
inconsistent. For example, in
countries where megacorps
effectively own the govern-
ment, these megacorps
reserve the right to operate
their own PLTGs while deny-
ing others the same right.
Similarly, Japan allows
Japanese-owned corpora-
tions PLTG access but denies
it to foreign corps. And is
anyone surprised to know
that Aztechnology’s PLTG is
the only corporate PLTG that
operates freely in Aztlan?
HOSTS
Hosts are the computer
systems that serve as the
backbone of the Sixth
World’s information society.
Billions of nuyen and ines-
timable megapulses of data
flow through these systems
daily. Hosts are the vaults
where these secret jewels are
stored. Hosts serve as data-
banks, research file storage,
libraries, virtual shopping
malls, chat rooms, virtual arcades, private meeting sites, bul-
letin boards, local networks, archives, banks, and so forth.
Off-Line Hosts
Not all hosts are connected to the Matrix. Many highly-
paranoid, ultra-secure sites specifically avoid Matrix connec-
tions due to the threat of intrusion by unauthorized deckers.
The only way for a decker to access such a host is by jacking in
directly, at the physical location of the host. For example, to
access an off-line host containing highly sensitive research data
for the Saeder-Krupp megacorp, the decker would have to
physically penetrate the research facility and find a jackpoint by
which she may directly access the paydata.
MATRIX TOPOLOGY
The connections between grids and hosts define the basic
topology of the Matrix. Only four types of connections exist—
open-access, tiered-access, host-host access, and private-grid
access connections. Multiply those connections by millions of
hosts, criss-crossing through the grids, and you end up with a
network so complex only a decker could love it.
Open Access
Most computer systems use the open-access connection.
Quite simply, any host connected directly to a grid has an
open-access connection. Any user, anywhere in the world, can
use the public grids to access such hosts. All four of the hosts
in the Open Access Diagram are attached to the same LTG
(Local Telecommunications Grid). A decker can access any of
NORTH AMERICAN RTG SYSTEM RATINGS
RTG Security Access Control Index Files Slave
Aztlan Orange-3 8 8 6 7 7
California
Free State Green-4 6 8 6 6 7
Caribbean League
Cuba Orange-3 8 8 7 8 7
Grenada Orange-4 8 8 8 8 8
Jamaica Green-3 6 7 6 6 6
South Florida Green-2 6 7 6 6 6
Virgin Islands Green-2 6 7 6 6 6
CAS Green-3 6 8 7 8 8
NAN
Algonkian-Manitou Green-4 7 8 7 6 6
Athabaskan Green-3 6 8 6 6 6
Pueblo Orange-4 8 8 8 8 8
Salish-Shidhe Green-3 6 8 7 6 6
Sioux Orange-3 7 8 8 7 7
Trans-Polar Aleut Green-2 6 6 6 6 6
Ute Orange-3 7 8 7 7 7
Québec Green-2 6 8 8 7 7
Tir Tairngire Orange-5 7 8 8 7 7
Tsimshian Orange-5 8 8 8 8 8
UCAS Green-4 6 8 6 6 6
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
204 Shadowrun, Third Edition
them by connecting to that LTG. If he is already logged on to
one host, he can disconnect from that host and access another
host without terminating his Matrix run.
Tiered Access
In the Tiered Access Diagram, only Host A is connected
directly to the grid. Hosts B, C, and D are connected only to
Host A. In this arrangement, Host A functions as a 
first-tier sys-
tem; Hosts B, C, and D function as second-tier systems. Any
user who wants to access Hosts B, C, or D must first pass
through Host A. To get from Host B to Host C or D, the deck-
er must re-enter Host A.
Host-Host Access
A host-host access configuration consists of a set of hosts
linked directly to one another. No single host defends the oth-
ers. All perform specific jobs but must share data to do so.
First-tier systems can be designed to act as switchers, pass-
ing authorized users into second-tier hosts. Or first-tier systems
may allow users to pass to a private local telecommunications
grid (PLTG) that provides access to second-tier systems.
The classic Matrix security concept called 
chokepoint
design is a specific application of tiered access. In chokepoint
systems, the first-tier hosts carry as vicious security as is possi-
ble, with the second-tier hosts running relatively lower security.
Host-host configurations commonly appear in corporate
schemas. Typically, only a few hosts connect directly to public
grids, but numerous machines in the second tier of the system
are linked to each other. Deckers can only access hosts through
other computers that are linked to them. For example, a deck-
er in the LTG of the system in the Host-Host Diagram would
have to pass through Hosts B, C and D to reach Host E.
Private Grid Access
A private grid (PLTG) represents a proprietary communica-
tions network inhabited solely by the hosts of a given corpora-
tion, government, or consortium. These can range from small,
local networks called LANs (Local Area Networks) to global
PLTGs. Once a decker has accessed any host in a private grid,
he can access any other host connected to that grid.
Within a PLTG, hosts may be organized in tiered or host-
host access configurations—and are. In the Sixth World,
paranoia is not a pathology for Matrix-security designers—
It’s a requirement.
LTG GRID
LTG GRID
LTG GRID
LTG GRID
Host D Host C Host B Host A
Host
A
Host B
Host
C
Host
D
Host A
Host B Host E
Host C Host D
PLTG
Host
B
Host
A
Host
C
Host
D
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
205Shadowrun, Third Edition
SYSTEM ACCESS NODES
System-access nodes (SANs) connect host comput-
ers to grids and to each other. When a decker performs
a Logon to Host operation from the grid or from a dedi-
cated host connection, he enters the SAN icon for the
host he is invading. The gamemaster needs to decide—
in advance or on the fly—to which LTG a host with open
access is attached. Similarly, if the host can only be
accessed from a PLTG or via host-host access, then the
gamemaster needs to make that choice.
DISTRIBUTED DATABASES
The interconnection of computer networks can make for a
real scavenger hunt through the Matrix. Information that seems
to be stored on a host may in fact only be there “virtually.”
Should the file actually be accessed, one would find a pointer
to where the data is actually held on another connected host.
This can mean a decker may have to dig up a chain of reference
files on various hosts to lead him to the host that actually has
the data he wants. The gamemaster can roll 1D6 to determine
how many of these links exist in a given chain of files.
SYSTEM RATINGS
Every system, whether a grid or a host, has a Security
Rating and five subsystem ratings—Access, Control, Index,
Files and Slave. These ratings are collectively known as the
System Rating.
The gamemaster sets host System Ratings based on the
host’s Intrusion Difficulty. The gamemaster may use dice rolls
or his discretion to create these ratings.
INTRUSION DIFFICULTY
There are three levels of Intrusion Difficulties: Easy,
Average, or Hard. Generally, Intrusion Difficulty is based on the
level of “user-friendliness” that the system must have to do its
job, and the number of users who access the host on a typical
day. Easy systems share their functions among many different
users and offices. Average systems support smaller user-bases
than Easy systems, and they handle more limited and secure
transactions. Hard systems handle the most secure data and
restrict access to a favored few users.
SECURITY RATING
A Security Rating consists of a security code (a color) and
a Security Value (a number).
The four security codes are Blue (little or no security), Green
(average security), Orange (significant security), and Red (high
security). Reportedly, some systems contain killer defenses that
send their security codes right off the “official” color scale. Decker
slang calls these Ultra-Violet, UV, or black systems.
Generally, Security Values range from 4 to 12, though they
sometimes range higher. Double-digit values represent
extreme system security. The Security Value indicates the num-
ber of dice the gamemaster rolls to oppose a decker’s System
Tests (see 
System Tests, p. 209). It is also the number of dice
rolled for Security Tests.
SECURITY CODES
The security code of a host measures the level of security
precautions the host maintains. Generally, the code reflects the
sensitivity of the data on the host, but it may also simply reflect
the degree of paranoia suffered by the host’s owner.
Blue Hosts
Blue hosts include most public-service databases: newsfax
distribution systems, public library databases, directories of list-
ed commcodes—pretty much anything free, whether provided
by a government, a corp, or a private individual. Small busi-
nesses too poor to secure their systems tend to have Blue
hosts as well.
Green Hosts
Green hosts are average systems, but never make the mis-
take of thinking a Green host represents easy prey. They may
be more patient with intruders than the Orange or Red sys-
tems, but they can load any IC the hotter hosts mount.
Orange Hosts
Orange hosts pride themselves on being secure systems,
if not wild-eyed killer hosts. Orange hosts store your standard
“confidential” data and carry out processing that is important
but not absolutely essential to the host’s operators. Orange
systems include the typical factory controller and the networks
used by middle management in a typical corporate office.
Red Hosts
Red hosts offer the most security that a system may legal-
ly carry. They contain “top secret” data, often the kind owners
will kill to protect, and mission-critical process controls (life
support, vital labs and factories, power grids, and the like).
Anti-intrusion defenses tend to be lethal—deckers get no
“warning shots” on Red systems.
SUBSYSTEM RATINGS
The five subsystem ratings—Access, Control, Index, Files,
and Slave—represent the resistance of a system’s subsystems
to unauthorized manipulations by a decker. These ratings func-
tion as target numbers for all the tests a decker makes when
attempting to manipulate the system illegally. For example, an
unauthorized decker trying to read files on a system would use
his Computer Skill against the Access and Files Ratings of the
host in a Success Contest known as a System Test (see p. 209
for complete information). The Success Contest made against
the system’s Access Rating would get the decker into the host
HOST RATING TABLE
Intrusion Difficulty Security Value Subsystem Ratings
Easy 1D3 + 3 1D3 + 7
Average 1D3 + 6 2D3 + 9
Hard 2D3 + 6 1D6 + 12
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
206 Shadowrun, Third Edition
or grid. The test made against the system’s File Rating would
enable him to read the files themselves.
Keep in mind that a high subsystem rating does not impede
authorized users from using the subsystem. For example, a high
Access Rating does not affect the logon procedures of authorized
users. It simply makes illegal logon attempts more difficult.
Note that when a Passive Alert (p. 211) has been activat-
ed, all Subsystem Ratings are raised by 2.
Access Rating
The Access Rating measures a system’s resistance to
unauthorized access. To access a grid/host, an unauthorized
decker must pit his Computer Skill against the grid/host’s
Access Rating in a Success Contest.
Control Rating
The Control Rating measures a system’s resistance to
unauthorized administrative commands. For example, an unau-
thorized decker attempting to kick a legitimate user off a host
must make a Success Contest against the host’s Control Rating.
Generally, successful tests will enable deckers to reprogram a
system or defeat its security measures.
Index Rating
The Index Rating measures a system’s resistance to unau-
thorized searches. An unauthorized decker searching a grid or
host for a system address or specific file must make a Success
Contest against the grid/host’s Index Rating.
Files Rating
Deckers must make a Success Contest against the Files
Ratings whenever they attempt to illegally read or write
datafiles in a system. Deckers must also make tests to decrypt
encoded files and send output to devices such as faxprinters or
chip cookers.
Slave Rating
The Slave Rating governs the operation of remote devices
controlled by a system. For example, a Success Contest against
the Slave Rating enables an unauthorized decker to take con-
trol of devices manipulated by a host, such as security cameras
and elevators.
RATING FORMAT
System Ratings use the following shorthand format:
Security Code–Security Value/Access/Control/Index/Files/Slave
For example, a Red-6 system with Access and Index Ratings of
10, a Control Rating of 12, and Files and Slave Ratings equal to
9 would be written:
Red-6/10/12/10/9/9
The acronym “ACIFS”— Access Control Index Files Slave—may
make remembering this format easier.
CYBERDECKS
Cyberdecks are the tools that deckers use to interface with
the Matrix. In a nutshell, a cyberdeck is an extremely powerful
microcomputer cranking out enough processing power to
implement the ASIST interface, converting the decker’s neural
impulses into holographic command instructions. Running the
hottest utilities on the street, the cyberdeck gives the decker
the ability to dance across the electron sky.
All decks consist of certain components, fine-tuned by the
decker to present the most wiz icon possible. These compo-
nents generate the decker’s persona and define the decker’s
ratings in the Matrix.
Only one decker can jack into a cyberdeck at any given
time. The decker must be physically connected to the deck
through a fiber-optic jack to his datajack. The deck must be
physically connected to a jackpoint to use the Matrix.
DECK RATINGS
The power of a decker’s persona is defined by the pro-
cessing power of his deck’s MPCP (Master Persona Control
Program), and his Bod, Sensor, Evasion, and Masking pro-
grams. The MPCP represents the master operating system for
the deck and has an MPCP Rating that measures its ability to
take damage and continue functioning. The Bod, Sensor,
Evasion, and Masking programs are called persona programs.
The numeric ratings of these programs serve as the
“Attributes” for the decker’s persona and are used whenever
tests are made against the decker while in the Matrix. Deckers
also use utility programs, rated in the same manner (see
Utilities, p. 220).
The MPCP Rating is the central value for cyberdecks. The
MPCP Rating multiplied by 3 equals the maximum total of the
deck’s persona programs. No single Persona Rating may
exceed the MPCP Rating, and the maximum value for utility
programs is equal to the MPCP Rating.
The shorthand format for describing a cyberdeck’s ratings is:
MPCP Rating/Bod Rating/Evasion Rating/Masking Rating/
Sensor Rating
A deck with MPCP-8 and all Persona programs distributed
equally among the maximum total (3 x 8 = 24), would be writ-
ten as follows:
MPCP-8/6/6/6/6
If the decker increased his Bod Rating by 2 points, to the max-
imum of 8, he’d have to reduce the other Persona programs by
a total of 2. If he decided to reduce his Evasion and Sensor
Ratings by 1 each, the deck’s ratings would be written:
MPCP-8/8/5/6/5
HARDENING
Hardening represents internal deck programs specifically
designed to reinforce the deck’s resistance to invasive code
such as viruses, gray and black IC, etc.
For every point of Hardening, reduce the Power of any
Damage from Black IC to the on-line icon or the actual decker
by 1 for Resistance Tests. If your icon has been crashed by Gray
IC and it makes an Attack Test, for every 1 point of Hardening,
add 1 to the Target Number for the Attack Test.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
207Shadowrun, Third Edition
Hardening also works against the Black Hammer and
Killjoy utilities, but not against other attack utilities.
ACTIVE MEMORY
Active memory is the cyberdeck’s “RAM,” to use the old-
tech term. Just as hackers in the twentieth century talked about
having 64 megs of memory on their computers, a Sixth World
decker refers to 100 Mp of active memory on his deck.
A deck’s active memory limits the utility programs the
deck can run at any one time. For each Mp of Active Memory
the deck can have the equivelant Mp in utilities. For example,
a deck with 200 Mp of active memory can run no more than
200 Mp of utilities at any one time.
STORAGE MEMORY
Storage memory is analogous to the hard drives on old-
time computers. Any program in a deck’s storage memory can
be loaded onto the deck by using the Swap Memory operation.
(See 
System Operations, p. 214).
All utilities must be kept in storage memory, regardless of
whether you have them in active memory or not. Additionally,
storage memory is used for data uploads and downloads. The
total amount of MPs for all utilities, and other stored data can-
not exceed the storage memory of the deck. As such, if a deck-
er has only 500 Mp of storage memory left on his deck—
because of the number of utilities he is storing, he would not
be able to download any information over 500 Mp.
I/O SPEED
The input and output of a deck is analogous to the old
modems that connected terminals and computers back in the
dark ages of computing. All uploads and downloads are always
at the full I/O speed of the deck, in Mp per Combat Turn.
RESPONSE INCREASE
Response Increase is the Matrix equivalent of wired reflex-
es. Each point of Response Increase increases a persona’s
Reaction Attribute by 2 and Initiative by +1D6.
A deck can support only 3 points of Response Increase.
Furthermore, Response Increase cannot exceed a deck’s
MPCP Rating divided by 4, rounding fractions down (so a
deck with MPCP Rating 3 or below cannot sustain any level of
Response Increase).
DETECTION FACTOR
The gamemaster uses the decker’s Detection Factor as the
target number when making tests to detect a decker’s pres-
ence or prevent a decker from performing actions within the
Matrix (see 
System Tests, p. 209). To determine the decker’s
Detection Factor, calculate the average (round up) of the deck-
er’s Masking Rating and Sleaze program rating. For example,
an MPCP-8/6/8/6/4 deck, running a Sleaze-8 program, would
have a Detection Factor of 7. That’s [6 (Masking) + 8 (Sleaze
Rating) = 14] divided by 2 = 7.
If a decker is not running a Sleaze program (p. 221), the
Detection Factor equals half the Masking Rating. This makes a
drek-hot Sleaze program a necessity for any decker with aspi-
rations, not to mention a keen sense of self-preservation.
THE HACKING POOL
The Hacking Pool follows all the normal rules of dice pools,
as detailed in 
Game Concepts, p. 43. To determine a decker’s
Hacking Pool, add the decker’s Intelligence Rating and her
deck’s MPCP Rating, divide the total by 3 and round down.
(Any increases to a decker’s Intelligence apply to her Hacking
Pool as well, whether they come from cyberware or magic.
Increases are cumulative.)
Generally, Hacking Pool dice may be added to any test
made in the Matrix—System Tests, attack or defense tests,
maneuvers, or Attribute Tests.
Hacking Pool dice cannot be used in Body or Willpower
Tests made to resist the effects of gray or black IC that is dam-
aging the decker. Only Karma Pool dice, enhancements con-
nected to the cyberdeck, or magic boosts to the decker’s Body
or Willpower can help in such situations.
CYBERTERMINALS
Not everyone in the Matrix is using a cyberdeck to do their
job. In fact, most Matrix users jack in through a cyberterminal,
as decks are quite expensive and the corps don’t just hand
them out to every keypuncher and clerk in the office.
Cyberterminals are known by deckers as “tortoises” for their
lack of speed and finesse.
A cyberterminal is simply a keyboard with a viewing
screen and a set of electrodes or a datajack-plug. Some have
antiquated paraphernalia such as monitors, VR gloves and gog-
gles, or even a mouse or joystick.
STOCK CYBERDECK TYPES
Deck Active Storage I/O Response
Model Rating Hardening Memory Memory Speed Increase Cost
Allegiance Sigma MPCP–3 1 200 500 100 0 14,000¥
Sony CTY-360–D MPCP–5 3 300 600 200 1 70,000¥
Novatech Hyperdeck–6 MPCP–6 4 500 1000 240 1 125,000¥
CMT Avatar MPCP–7 4 700 1400 300 1 250,000¥
Renraku Kraftwerk–8 MPCP–8 4 1000 2000 360 2 400,000¥
Transys Highlander MPCP–9 4 1500 2500 400 2 600,000¥
Novatech Slimcase–10 MPCP–10 5 2000 2500 480 2 960,000¥
Fairlight Excalibur MPCP–12 6 3000 5000 600 3 1,500,000¥
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
208 Shadowrun, Third Edition
These terminals have roughly the same ratings as
cyberdecks, however no cyberterm can have an MPCP higher
than 4. They cannot be outfitted with Response Increase, and
any programs run on them have their ratings reduced by 1 to
reflect the lack of fine control that cyberdecks provide. On the
positive side, tortoise users cannot be hurt by black IC or dump
shock, and they generally cost 10 percent the price of an
equivalent cyberdeck.
ACCESSORIES
Cyberdecks and cyberterminals frequently come with
accessories such as off-line storage, or a vid-screen display so
that others may shoulder-surf the Matrix going-ons from the
decker’s point-of-view. Hitcher jacks, whether electrodes or
datajack feeds, allow others to “jack in” and shoulder-surf
directly, as the decker’s icon. Hitchers cannot manipulate or
effect the decker’s persona in any way, they are merely along
for the ride. Hitchers are also protected from nasty IC side-
effects in the same way as cyberterminal users. Many people
find it annoying to hitch, as they cannot control the movements
or perspective of the decker. Prices for these accessories can be
found in 
Street Gear, p. 304.
RUNNING THE MATRIX
Decking is an art. How it is done is often as important as
what is being done; the egos and one-upmanship battles
among deckers are legendary, even outside their own circles.
There is an entire subculture of Matrix existence out there to
explore. It’s a whole different world in the machine, chummer.
MOVEMENT IN THE MATRIX
Movement in the Matrix is virtually instantaneous unless
the decker is engaged in Matrix combat, attempting to deal
with IC, performing system operations, transferring data, or
loading programs. In the Matrix, data is transmitted at
megabaud rates (that’s fast, folks), and system response is
measured in microseconds. Only when dealing with some-
thing that requires real attention does the action slow down to
where the decker can notice time passing.
When moving in the Matrix, Distance is 
entirely relative. It
is a matter of commline connections, available memory in sub-
systems, and switching systems and transmission rates, not
actual meters and kilometers. Sure, the decker can float leisure-
ly from point to point, but why crawl when it’s possible to
zoom? Perception is everything.
Subjective Time
Keep in mind that characters experience time somewhat
subjectively in the Matrix. The apparent time spent moving
through the Matrix environment may be much longer than the
actual game time used to perform actions. For example, a
decker who makes a single system operation to find a file may
experience the test as a walk down a long hallway lined with
books, which ends when he finds the icon he wants. He may
feel as if he has spent several minutes or even hours searching,
when actually only a few seconds of game time have elapsed. 
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
209Shadowrun, Third Edition
Exiting the Matrix
A decker can leave the Matrix any time by jacking out,
pulling the plug that connects his datajack to the deck. Keep in
mind that the decker’s Matrix-image, the persona, is only a
program running on the computers of the Matrix. The persona
does not really 
go anywhere and has no independent con-
sciousness. Despite decker legends, one cannot get “trapped”
in the Matrix. Jacking out is a Free Action, unless the decker is
under attack by black IC (see p. 230).
A decker kicked out of the Matrix involuntarily has been
dumped. The rapid cutoff of the deck’s simsense signal can
cause the decker to experience mild disorientation called
dump shock. See 
Dump Shock, p. 227 for effects.
MATRIX PERCEPTION
Inside a grid, distances appear vast and the scale enor-
mous, although there is no “real” distance involved. Inside
hosts, distances and space can appear infinite or cramped,
depending on the prevailing metaphor. In technical terms, the
question is whether the persona (remember, it’s only a pro-
gram) is able to access the data space of other pro-
grams or the controllers for hardware ele-
ments in a system. In an odd sort of
way distance is relative to the
amount of time (in nanoseconds
mostly) that it will take the deck
to access the hardware of the
next node.
Noticing New Icons
Whenever a new icon, such as a
decker or program, enters the area cur-
rently occupied by the decker, she may
make a free Sensor Test (no utilities
allowed), to see if she becomes aware
of the new icon. The target number for
this test is Masking Rating + sleaze
utility if the icon is a decker, or the
icon’s rating if it is IC or another
program. Only 1 success is neces-
sary to detect the icon (if the icon is
IC, 2 successes will tell the type and
3 will reveal the rating), although
the decker may not know what the
icon represents unless she performs
an Analyze Icon operation (see p.
215). Once located, the icon remains “visible” unless it
maneuvers to escape the decker (see 
Combat
Maneuvers, p. 224). This Free Action represents the
capability of the deck’s sensors in identifying other
programs. If the Sensor Test fails to detect the icon,
the decker is unaware of its presence until it
chooses to reveal itself or attacks her.
If a decker suspects the presence of another
icon, she can use a Locate operation (see p.
217) to verify that suspicion. 
Noticing Triggered IC
Deckers don’t always know when they trigger IC. Before a
decker can attack IC or take other measures to neutralize it, a
decker must first “locate” the IC.
Obviously, a decker can easily locate proactive IC as soon as
it attacks her. Once located, the IC remains “visible” unless it ma-
neuvers to escape the decker (see 
Combat Maneuvers,p. 224).
Reactive IC is more insidious, because it does not betray
its presence to the decker by any actions. Whenever a decker
triggers reactive IC, the gamemaster secretly makes a Sensor
Test against a target number equal to the IC’s Rating. If the test
results in 1 success, the gamemaster informs the decker that
her actions triggered IC. On 2 successes, the gamemaster tells
the decker the type of IC triggered. On 3 or more successes,
the gamemaster reveals the IC’s Rating and location. This
Sensor Test is made only once, when the IC becomes active.
If a decker suspects the presence of active IC, she can use
the Locate IC operation (see p. 217) to check out that suspicion.
NON-COMBAT ACTIONS
For non-combat actions, deckers need not roll for
Initiative. Instead, divide the decker’s Reaction Attribute (aug-
mented by Response Increase) by 10 (round up the result). The
result is the number of actions the decker may perform during
each 3-second game turn (equivalent to a
Combat Turn). Add 1 action for every
Initiative die the decker receives in the
Matrix beyond the standard 1D6.
For example, a decker with 2
actions per turn could perform a Logon
to Host operation (a Complex Action)
and an Analyze Icon operation (a Free
Action) on his first Initiative Pass. On the
next action, he could perform an Analyze
Host operation (a Complex Action). See p.
224 for a list of actions deckers can perform
and p. 214 for details on system operations.
Reactive IC programs that perform
tasks at the end of a Combat Turn act after
all deckers have performed their allot-
ted actions for a turn.
SYSTEM TESTS
In order to perform specific
tasks in the Matrix, a decker submits
a command or series of commands to
the host/grid. These commands are
known as system operations (see p.
214 for a detailed list of system opera-
tions that deckers can perform). Each such
operation requires a specific game action
(Free, Simple, or Complex) and is affiliated
with a specific subsystem (Access, Control,
Index, File, and Slave), all noted under their
individual descriptions.
In addition, unauthorized
deckers must make a test—known
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
210 Shadowrun, Third Edition
as a System Test—whenever they attempt to perform system
operations within the Matrix. This is due to the fact that as unau-
thorized Matrix users they must coerce various computer sys-
tems to commit processing time and power to their tasks. The
more a deckers tasks a system, the more likely the system is to
become aware of the intruder and activate countermeasures.
System Tests are always resolved as a Success Contest
between the decker and the target host/grid. The decker uses
his Computer Skill (or specialization in Decking) to make a test
using the Subsystem Rating appropriate to the operation he is
attempting as the target number. For example, a Logon To
Host operation requires a Computer (Access Rating) Test. The
target number for these tests may be modified by appropriate
utility programs the decker is running (see 
System Operations
for utilities appropriate to specific operations, p. 214). Hacking
Pool may be used for System Tests.
At the same time, the host/grid rolls makes a Security
Test, rolling its Security Value against a target number equal to
the decker’s Detection Factor.
If the decker achieves more or an equal amount of suc-
cesses than the host/grid, he wins the Success Contest and
succeeds at whatever task he is attempting to perform. If the
host achieves more successes, the decker fails. 
Regardless of the test outcome, the gamemaster records
the host’s number of successes and adds the total to any pre-
vious successes the host achieved in System Tests against the
decker. This running total creates the security tally.
For simplicity’s sake, many System Tests are referred to by
the subsystem that is affected. For example, the term Access
Test applies to a Success Contest that pits the decker’s
Computer (Access Rating) Test against the computer’s Security
(Detection Factor) Test. Likewise, Files Test, Index Test, Control
Test, and Slave Test are used as shorthand.
The following example illustrates the first step any decker
is going to take: getting into the host within which he wants to
operate.
HeadCrash has Computing-6 and an MPCP-8/6/6/6/6
deck. He is running Sleaze-5, so his Detection Factor is 6
(6 + 5 = 11, divided by 2 = 5.5, rounded up). He is also
running Deception-4. Head is decking into a Red-8 host
with Access-11. He needs to make a Logon To Host
Operation, which is a Computer (Access) Test, to log on.
HeadCrash rolls 6 dice, his Computer Skill. The target
number is: 11 (Access Rating) minus 4 (Deception Utility
Rating), for a final Target Number of 7.
The gamemaster rolls 8 dice, the host’s Security Value,
against a Target Number 6, Head’s Detection Factor.
HeadCrash achieves results of 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, for one
success against the Target Number of 7. The host achieves
results of 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 5, 5—no successes. HeadCrash
logs on to the host. He got lucky, and he’d better hope his
luck holds.
Note that had HeadCrash not been running the
Deception program, his Target Number would have been
11 rather than 7. He’d have had no successes, and would
have failed to log on. Moral: you can’t do anything unless
you can get into a host in the first place, so a good
Deception program is a must for any decker interested in
hosts with high security levels.
SYSTEM OPERATIONS ON GRIDS
Certain locations, such as the physical jackpoint at the
beginning of a run, can limit a decker’s options in terms of sys-
tem operations. In addition to the following system operations,
deckers can always perform a Graceful Logoff operation at any
time. (See
System Operations, p. 214.)
From a Jackpoint
Deckers jacking in via legal or illegal telecom connections
can only perform the Logon to LTG operation. Then they have
to find the host/grid they want to invade, if they don’t know its
location. Deckers jacking in via a dedicated workstation, slave-
controlled remote device, or console can only perform the
Logon to Host operation and must log on to the host that con-
trols the gizmo they are using for access.
On an LTG
Once logged on to an LTG, the decker can move to the
parent RTG with a Logon to RTG operation or try to access any
host connected to the LTG with a Logon to Host operation. If a
PLTG is attached to the LTG the decker is on, he can use a
Logon to LTG to try to break into it.
On an RTG
Once logged on to an RTG, the decker can either move to
another RTG (i.e., make a “long-distance call” to get on to the
grid in another part of the world) by using a Logon to RTG
operation or enter any LTG attached to the RTG with a Logon
to LTG operation.
The character may also perform the Locate Access Node
operation on an RTG.
On a PLTG
A decker logged on to a PLTG may perform any System
Operation available on public RTGs and LTGs.
SECURITY TALLY
The gamemaster tallies all the successes a host/grid
achieves while opposing a decker in System Tests. This
includes all successes made, not just net successes (in other
words, even if the host/grid lost the System Test, it may still
have scored some successes and raised the decker’s security
tally). This tally runs as long as the decker is logged on to that
particular host/grid. When the tally reaches a level set by the
gamemaster, it may trigger actions within the host/grid, rang-
ing from the activation of black IC programs to nothing at all.
The bottom line is that a decker never knows what will happen
as a result of his next test, or how many more tests he can safe-
ly afford before the host/grid catches on to his presence and
does its best to crash him.
SECURITY SHEAVES
A security sheaf describes the security measures in place
on a host or grid as well as how the host/grid reacts to intrud-
ers. Quite simply, a sheaf consists of a list of trigger steps.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
211Shadowrun, Third Edition
These steps represent security tally
thresholds. As a decker’s security tally
reaches each trigger step, the system
activates one or more IC programs.
Trigger steps also activate the various
alert levels in a system. The alert status
of the system, in turn, affects the types
of IC programs the system activates.
The security code of the host/grid
determines the frequency of trigger
steps in a system, and the gamemaster determines the events
activated by each trigger step. Gamemasters may use their own
discretion or random generation to determine these events.
Trigger Steps
As noted above, trigger steps consist of specific security
tally numbers. Whenever the security tally of a decker reaches
or exceeds one of a system’s trigger steps, the system auto-
matically activates one or more security measures, such as IC
programs or alerts. Low-security systems, such as Blue hosts,
maintain few trigger steps—as a result, they have fewer IC pro-
grams and other security measures. High-security systems,
such as Red hosts, set trigger steps in small increments, and so
they have more IC programs and security measures.
A system’s security sheaf lists the system’s trigger steps
and indicates the events triggered at each step. The Sample
Security Sheaf Table depicts a system that activates a Probe-5
IC program when a decker’s security tally reaches 3. When a
decker’s security tally reaches 7, the system activates a Probe-
7 IC program, and so on.
Gamemasters may assign system trigger steps at their
own discretion or generate them randomly. If generating trig-
ger steps using dice rolls, roll 1D6 ÷ 2 and apply the appropri-
ate modifier from the Trigger Step Table to the roll result, based
on the system security code. Add each die result to the previ-
ous trigger step.
To create a high-security system, simply use the lowest
value in the security-code range when determining the sys-
tem’s trigger steps. For more mild-mannered systems, use the
highest values when setting the steps.
For example, a low-security Blue host might have the fol-
lowing trigger steps: 6, 12, 19, 24, 31, 36, 42, and so on.
Multiple Triggers
If a decker performs several actions on a system that
together add a large number of points to his security tally all at
once, the increase may cover two or more trigger steps. In this
case, the indicated events for ALL the triggered steps that have
been reached or exceeded occur at once (otherwise known as
“the drek hits the power supply”).
GRID SECURITY TALLIES
Switching LTGs within the same RTG does
not affect the security tally against a decker. For
example, if a decker logs on to UCAS-SEA-2206
and incurs a tally of 2, then logs on to the UCAS-
SEA RTG central system and picks up another
point to his tally, then finally accesses UCAS-SEA-
4206 and picks up another 2 points,
his Security Tally stands at 5 and stays
at 5 for as long as he is logged on to
the UCAS-SEA grids. However, the
tally does not follow the decker if he
logs on to another RTG.
PLTGs and Security Tallies
Because PLTGs maintain very
active security routines, a security
tally built up under a given RTG does remain in force if the
decker logs on to a PLTG from the RTG. This occurs because
PLTGs pick up security “flags” from RTGs when they acknowl-
edge logons. This means that a decker who racks up a big tally
working his way through the public grids may trigger IC as
soon as he enters private dataspace.
The decker in our example, with a Security Tally of 5,
would retain that tally when he enters a PLTG from the RTG. If
that tally is enough to trigger security responses in the PLTG,
they go off as soon as he finishes the logon. Whatever the
immediate result, his Security Tally on the PLTG begins at 5,
plus any points he incurs while logging on.
ALERTS
After determining the intervals of the trigger steps for a sys-
tem, the gamemaster chooses the IC programs and security
measures activated by each trigger step. In order to determine
an appropriate level of response for each trigger, however, the
gamemaster must first determine the timing of the system alerts.
All systems have three alert statuses—no alert, passive
alert, and active alert. The normal status for all systems is no-
alert. Specific trigger steps activate passive and active alerts. In
turn, the alert status of a system determines the types of IC
programs that go into action at the system’s trigger steps.
No Alert
Generally, trigger steps under a no-alert status activate
reactive IC programs.
Passive Alert
In a typical security sheaf, the third or fourth trigger step
activates a passive alert.
Passive alert means that a system suspects an intruder has
invaded it, but is not 100 percent certain. Under passive-alert
status, trigger steps typically activate proactive white or gray IC
programs.
When a system goes on passive alert status, increase all
Subsystem Ratings by 2.
SAMPLE SECURITY SHEAF TABLE
Trigger Step Event
3 Probe-5
7 Probe-7
10 Killer-8, Passive Alert
13 Killer-10, Active Alert
System Security Code Die Roll Modifier/Trigger Step Range
Blue +4 modifier, for a final range of 5 to 7
Green +3 modifier, for a final range of 4 to 6
Orange +2 modifier, for a final range of 3 to 5
Red +1 modifier, for a final range of 2 to 4
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
212 Shadowrun, Third Edition
Active Alert
A typical system goes on active-alert status on the second
or third trigger step after the system goes to passive alert.
Active alert means the system has verified the presence of an
illegal icon.
Under active-alert status, trigger steps typically activate
proactive and sometimes black IC programs. Trigger steps may
also activate corporate or law-enforcement deckers in the system.
Once a system reaches active-alert status, running away
and sneaking back into the system become much more difficult
for illegal deckers. Security personnel know that someone has
been snooping around, and the system managers remain par-
ticularly vigilant for some time to come.
HOST/GRID RESET
If a decker logs on to a host/grid, raises nine kinds of
havoc, jacks it up to within a hair of shutting down and then
logs off, he can’t expect to log back in five minutes later and
find that all is forgiven and forgotten. Undoubtedly, the
host/grid will still be running IC programs and other security
measures. Before jacking back in, the decker will want to wait
until the host/grid “decides” to reduce its alert level, deactivate
running IC programs and in general get back to work. That
process is known as a host/grid reset.
Blue systems reset completely in 2D6 minutes, during which
time the system deactivates security measures and the security
tally drops to 0. More secure systems do not reset as quickly.
Green, Orange, and Red systems begin to reset after 3D6 min-
utes, provided the decker did not trigger a passive or active alert.
If a decker triggers an alert on a Green, Orange, or Red
host/grid, the system resets even more slowly. Roll 1D6 every
5 minutes for Green systems, every 10 minutes for Orange sys-
tems, and every 15 minutes for Red systems. Reduce the sys-
tem’s security tally by the result. Any IC program left running
when the decker logged off remains running until the security
tally drops below the trigger step that activated the IC.
If any decker logs on to the host/grid illegally before it fin-
ishes its reset, his security tally begins at the level the security
tally had dropped to when the intrusion occurred.
Selena invaded an Orange host and raised its security
tally to 18 before she logged off with a killer IC program lust-
ing for her chitlins. The system then began a host reset.
Half an hour later, when Cybersushi logs onto the same
host, the system is still resetting. Its security tally stands at 6.
During Selena’s run, the host went on passive-alert status at
trigger step 5, so the system remains on passive alert. The
killer IC activated at 12, so the IC program has shut down.
TRIGGERING IC
IC stands for intrusion countermeasures. (For all you Matrix
virgins, it’s pronounced “ice.”) Some IC just impedes the decker,
maybe tries to get a network ID on him. Other programs are
designed to crash his icon off the Matrix. Still others go after his
deck. Finally, there’s black IC—which flat out tries to kill him.
This section describes IC programs and their ratings. For
details on specific IC programs and how they function, see
Intrusion Countermeasures, p. 227.
PROACTIVE VS. REACTIVE
IC is either proactive or reactive. Proactive IC attacks the
decker in cybercombat once it is alerted to his presence (see
Cybercombat, p. 222). Proactive IC acts like a hostile NPC. It
makes Initiative rolls during combat, maneuvers for advantage,
and uses its weapons and other tricks.
Reactive IC, on the other hand, just “sits there.” It may
activate when the security tally reaches a specific threshold,
decker actions may trigger it, or it may reside in a specific loca-
tion or resource of the host, such as a file, slave remote, or
even an entire subsystem. In the latter case, the IC becomes
active when a decker accesses the protected location or
resource. Once a decker triggers reactive IC, the IC affects the
decker’s operations until the decker destroys or deceives it, or
otherwise convinces it to go away. Reactive IC rarely possess-
es Initiative.
CRASHING IC
Whenever a decker “kills” or crashes IC in cybercombat,
add the rating of the crashed IC to the decker’s security tally.
The rationale for this is that crashing IC is like opening up on a
perimeter guard with full autocannon fire—the action destroys
the guard but alerts his colleagues that company’s coming.
Suppressing IC
A decker can avoid the penalty for crashing IC by sup-
pressing it when he destroys it. However, suppressing IC low-
ers a decker’s Detection Factor. Reduce a decker’s Detection
Factor by 1 for each IC program he suppresses. This reduction
remains in effect as long as the decker remains in the system,
unless he releases the suppressed IC.
Deckers must declare their intention to suppress IC as soon
as they crash it. Deckers may “unsuppress” or release IC at any
time. For each IC program the decker releases, he regains 1 point
to his Detection Factor. His security tally, however, increases by
the appropriate amount for each released IC program.
Deckers cannot suppress IC in a system they have left.
IC RATINGS
Each IC program has its own rating. This rating measures
the damage the IC does or acts as a target number for tests the
decker makes to avoid its effects. It is also used to make cer-
tain tests, such as the Scramble Test made by scramble IC to
delete data, or the Probe Test made by probe IC to increase the
security tally (see individual IC descriptions under 
Intrusion
Countermeasures, p. 227).
In cybercombat, an IC program makes its Attack Tests
using its host’s Security Value as a “skill”, determining the
number of dice it rolls. In other words, the host computer
attacks the decker and uses the IC as a weapon.
The host/grid’s Security Value also equals the number of dice
rolled to make Damage Resistance Tests for the IC program.
TYPES OF IC
There are three specific types of intrusion countermea-
sures. Below is a short description of each type of IC. For fur-
ther explanation, see 
Intrusion Countermeasures, p. 227.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
214 Shadowrun, Third Edition
White
White IC is only programmed to attack a decker’s on-line
icon and cannot permanently damage the decker or his deck.
Gray
Gray IC is designed to specifically target the decker’s
cyberdeck and utilities, which can result in permanent damage.
Black
Black IC is specifically programmed to attack the decker
himself, creating dangerous biofeedback between the decker
and his cyberdeck, possibly leading to permanent physical and
psychological damage or even death.
SYSTEM OPERATIONS
Almost any task a decker may perform in cyberspace is
expressed as a system operation. This section covers most of
them. If a decker wants to perform some action not covered in
the listed system operations, gamemasters may create their own
system operations, using those described here as guidelines.
In game terms, a system operation is not a skill or pro-
gram—it is simply a rules procedure for determining whether
the decker succeeds in performing his intended action. Every
system operation consists of three parts: a System Test, an
appropriate utility, and a type of game action.
The System Test indicates which type of Success Contest the
decker makes to perform the action: Access Test, Control Test,
Index Test, Files Test, or Slave Test. Each test is uses the appro-
priate Subsystem Rating of the host/grid as the target number.
Each operation description lists appropriate utilities that deckers
may use to reduce the target number for the System Test. As part
of the Success Contest, the gamemaster makes an opposed
Security Test for the host/grid against the decker’s Detection
Factor (see 
System Tests,p. 209 for further information).
The action listed in each operation entry describes what
type of game action—Free Action, Simple Action, or Complex
Action—the decker must spend to perform the operation. Very
simple operations—obtaining a single piece of information,
manipulating a single control on a virtual panel for a machine,
and so on—are generally Free Actions. Such tasks are the
Matrix equivalents of opening doors or looking out windows.
More complex operations involving a single program, icon, or
control usually are Simple Actions. Any task involving a search,
analysis, or control of a complicated or precise process is a
Complex Action.
Most system operations fall into one of three broad cate-
gories: interrogations, ongoing operations, and monitored
operations. 
INTERROGATIONS
In most system operations, a decker gives the host/grid
system an order, which the system immediately carries out.
During interrogation operations, however, a decker engages in
a “dialogue” with a system as he searches for specific informa-
tion. A decker may have to repeat an interrogation operation
more than once to locate the exact file or slave control that he
needs. Keep track of a decker’s successes when he performs an
interrogation operation. When he accumulates 5 or more suc-
cesses, he has located the objective of his search. Alternatively,
the gamemaster may independently assign the number of suc-
cesses needed to find a piece of data, or even build a list of
data to reveal to the decker as the character achieves specific
numbers of successes.
The more precisely the decker defines the criteria for the
interrogation, the better his chances of success in an interroga-
tion operation. The character should provide specific references
to names, events, or functions in order to succeed. Conduct-
ing an interrogation operation resembles legwork in the phys-
ical 
Shadowrun world—the character must ask questions until
he gets the answer he needs or verifies that the information is
not available.
Apply a +1 target-number modifier to tests for any vague
or general questions the character poses during an interroga-
tion operation. Apply a +2 modifier for extremely vague or
general questions. For well-phrased, very relevant or insightful
inquiries, apply a –1 or – 2 target-number modifier to tests.
Remember, computers can be programmed to conceal data but
they cannot lie—so a decker who puts together clues from an
adventure to make a good inquiry should have a better chance
of success than one who is shooting in the dark.
If a host/grid does not have the information the decker is
after, reveal this to the decker after he achieves 3 or 
more successes.
In addition, after all the interrogating is accomplished, a
decker may have only found a pointer that gives him the
address of a file on another host. The decker may in fact have
to follow several links through several hosts before he actually
scores the data. See 
Distributed Databases, p. 205.
The following operations are interrogation operations:
Locate Access Node, Locate File, Locate Slave.
Grid Reaper is running Matrix overwatch while his
friends do a run on a corp facility. He hears over the radio
that they’re trapped inside a room, and are being hit with
knockout gas. If he doesn’t stop it fast, his buddies are hell
hound food.
In order to shut off the gas system, Reaper must first find
the slave subsystem that’s controlling it—an interrogation
operation. He performs a Locate Slave operation, and the
gamemaster awards him a –1 target number modifier
because he knows where exactly this slave system is locat-
ed in the building and what it’s doing. He only gets 1 suc-
cess, but at least he’s on the trail. His buddies are quickly
passing out, so he interrogates the host some more, making
another Locate Slave operation. This time, he scores 4 net
successes, and locates the slave. Unfortunately for Reaper
(and his pals), he won’t have time to turn the gas delivery
system off, because he triggered some IC … .
ONGOING OPERATIONS
Some operations are finished as soon as the decker suc-
ceeds at the System Test. Other operations, such as uploads
and downloads, take time. In these ongoing operations, the
decker begins the operation, then allows it to run without giv-
ing it any further directions.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
215Shadowrun, Third Edition
The time required for ongoing operations is measured in
seconds, according to the rules for the specific operation. If the
operation interacts with other events, the gamemaster should
calculate the exact point in a Combat Turn that the operation is
completed.
To convert seconds to Combat Turns, divide the number of
seconds by 3 (round up). For example, John is performing a
utility upload that requires 6 seconds. That translates to 2
Combat Rounds, so if John begins the upload at the start of
Combat Turn 3 he can begin using the uploaded utility at the
start of Turn 5 or halfway through Turn 4. If the upload took 7
seconds, that would translate to 2 Turns plus a 1–second
remainder. In this case, John cannot begin using the uploaded
utility until his second or third Initiative Pass of Combat Turn 5
(gamemaster’s discretion).
The following are ongoing operations: Download Data,
Swap Memory, Upload Data.
MONITORED OPERATIONS
Monitored operations must be carefully controlled after
they are set in motion. After a decker makes the initial System
Test to begin a monitored operation, he must spend a Free
Action to maintain the operation each Initiative Pass. If he fails
even once to spend these actions, the operation aborts and he
must repeat the operation System Test to restart it.
In some cases, allowing a monitored operation to abort
may result in irreversible consequences in the real world. For
example, a decker may be running an Edit Slave operation that
prevents a security camera from showing human guards the
image of the decker’s companions breaking into their facility. If
the decker allows the Edit Slave operation to abort, the guards
may see the decker’s companions and foil the run—or worse.
The following are considered monitored operations: Control
Slave, Edit Slave, Make Comcall, Monitor Slave, Tap Comcall.
OPERATIONS DESCRIPTIONS
The following text provides specific information on the
current set of available system operations. The gamemaster
should feel free to invent additional system operations based
on character-deckers’ proposed actions.
Analyze Host
Test: Control
Utility: Analyze
Action: Complex
An Analyze Host operation enables a decker to analyze
the ratings of a host. For each net success in the System Test,
the decker chooses one of the following pieces of information,
which the gamemaster supplies:
•the host’s Security Rating (code and value)
•the rating of any one of the five subsystems on the host
Seven or more successes gain the decker all the available
information about the host. Note that a decker must be on the
host to run an Analyze Host operation on it—no sneak pre-
views from the grid.
Analyze IC
Test: Control
Utility: Analyze
Action: Free
The Analyze IC operation enables a decker to identify any
specific IC program that he has located (deckers may locate IC
programs by performing Locate IC operations or by coming
under attack from the IC program). If the Analyze IC operation
succeeds, the decker learns the type and rating of the IC pro-
gram and any options or defenses it carries.
Analyze Icon
Test: Control
Utility: Analyze
Action: Free
The Analyze Icon operation scans any icon and identifies
its general type: IC, persona, application and so on. The deck-
er may reduce the Control Test target number by his Sensor
Rating and any analyze utility he is running. However, the test
target number may not drop below 2, regardless of the deck-
er’s combined Sensor and analyze utility ratings.
Analyze Security
Test: Control
Utility: Analyze
Action: Simple
The Analyze Security operation tells the decker the current
Security Rating of the host, the decker’s security tally on the
host (including any tally points accrued by the test for Analyze
Security), and the host’s alert status.
Analyze Subsystem
Test: Targeted Subsystem
Utility: Analyze
Action: Simple
An Analyze Subsystem operation identifies anything out of
the ordinary about the targeted subsystem. The operation iden-
tifies the presence of scramble IC programs or other defenses
or system tricks present on the subsystem.
Control Slave
Test: Slave
Utility: Spoof
Action: Complex
The Control Slave operation enables a decker to take con-
trol of a remote device controlled by the host’s Slave sub-
system. Remote devices range from simple automatic security
doors and elevators to entire automated factories full of robot-
ic assemblers.
If the decker is attempting to take control of a manufactur-
ing or scientific process controlled by the Slave subsystem, he
must make the System Test with the average of his ratings in
Computer Skill and a B/R or Knowledge Skill that applies to the
process. For example, a decker attempting to take control of an
automated medical lab would make the test with an average of
his Computer and Biotech Skills, or Computer and Medicine
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
216 Shadowrun, Third Edition
Skills, or Computer and some similar skill. Be strict about appro-
priate skills here, especially if the decker is attempting a task that
might call for some obscure skill specialization.
The Control Slave operation is a monitored operation.
Decrypt Access
Test: Access
Utility: Decrypt
Action: Simple
The Decrypt Access operation defeats scramble IC pro-
grams guarding access to a host. IC programs on a scrambled
SAN must be defeated with a Decrypt Access operation before
a decker can perform a Logon to Host operation on a scram-
bled SAN.
Decrypt File
Test: Files
Utility: Decrypt
Action: Simple
The Decrypt File operation defeats scramble IC programs
on a file. Deckers must perform successful Decrypt File opera-
tions on scrambled files before performing other operations on
such files. A file with scrambled IC program cannot be down-
loaded until after it has been decrypted.
Decrypt Slave
Test: Slave
Utility: Decrypt
Action: Simple
The Decrypt Slave operation defeats scramble IC programs
on a Slave subsystem. A decker cannot make Slave Tests
against a scrambled Slave subsystem until he has performed a
successful Decrypt Slave operation on the subsystem.
Download Data
Test: Files
Utility: Read/Write
Action: Simple
The Download Data operation copies a file from the host
to the decker’s cyberdeck. The data moves at the decks I/O
speed. It may be transferred to active memory, storage mem-
ory, or even off-line storage.
The Download Data operation is an ongoing operation that
continues until the data transfer is completed, the decker logs
off or is crashed, or the decker terminates the download early.
If the operation is terminated before the transfer is completed,
it creates a corrupted copy of the file, which is worthless.
However, if the file contains information that is particular-
ly important to an adventure, the gamemaster may allow par-
tially completed downloads to produce damaged, yet readable
file copies. The base time to reconstruct a damaged file is cal-
culated as follows:
(full file size in Mp divided by amount of 
data downloaded in Mp) x 2.
The result is in days. Once a damaged file is reconstructed, the
gamemaster determines whether the file contains the pertinent
information by dividing the size of the downloaded file by the
full size of the original file.
For example, if a decker manages to copy 10 Mp of a 100
Mp file, the base time for reconstructing the file is (100 ÷ 10) x
2, or 20 days. Dividing 10 by 100 yields .10, so there is a 10
percent chance that the copied file contains the pertinent infor-
mation.
Edit File
Test: Files
Utility: Read/Write
Action: Simple
The Edit File operation enables a decker to create, change,
or erase a datafile. Small changes (approximately one line of
print or the equivalent of one short form of some kind) can be
made directly on the host by performing this operation. Before
replacing larger amounts of data, the decker must prepare the
new material off-line first, then upload it and perform an Edit
File operation to insert it into the file. Any uploaded informa-
tion may be inserted with a single Edit File operation, regard-
less of its size.
A successful System Test creates new files. Because these
files have counterfeit headers, the operating system may notice
irregularities.
Deckers also can use Edit File operations to make copies of
files on the same host. Thus, deckers can copy a file from a par-
ticularly secure datastore, stash it on a less secure part of the
same host and retrieve it at a later time. When using the Edit
File operation in this manner, a decker must make two System
Tests. The first test is a Files Test. The second test is made
against the subsystem that controls the location where the
decker hid the copied file.
After altering, inserting, or deleting a file, a decker may
make a Control Test, with target number reduced by his
read/write utility, to authenticate the file’s headers. Note the
number of successes. If the decker fails to successfully take this
step, make a Masking (Files) Test. The number of successes is
the number of hours before the host notices the tampered file
and reports it to the host’s supervisor.
Deckers may also check to determine whether a file has
been tampered with. If the file was altered by an unauthorized
decker who failed to make a Control Test to authenticate the
headers, then a simple Files Test will reveal the tampering. If
the file headers were authenticated, the Files Test must achieve
more successes than the tampering decker achieved on the
Control Test to recognize signs of tampering in the file.
Keep in mind that any time a decker deletes a host file, the
gamemaster must consider the impact on the adventure in
progress and decide whether back-up copies of the file exist.
Edit Slave
Test: Slave
Utilities: Spoof
Action: Complex
This operation enables a decker to modify data sent to or
received from a remote device controlled by the host’s Slave
subsystem. For example, a decker could perform Edit Slave
operations to alter video signals or sensor readings from a
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
217Shadowrun, Third Edition
computer-controlled security system or alter readings being
sent to a console or simulator.
The Edit Slave operation is a monitored operation.
Graceful Logoff
Test: Access
Utility: Deception
Action: Complex
The Graceful Logoff operation enables a decker to discon-
nect from a host and the LTG where he logged on to the grid
without experiencing dump shock.
In addition, a successful Graceful Logoff operation clears
all traces of the decker and his actions from the security and
memory systems of the host. A track utility in its location cycle
will add its rating as a target number modifier to any Graceful
Logoff attempts (see 
Track, p. 221).
Locate Access Node
Test: Index
Utility: Browse
Action: Complex
The Locate Access Node operation is “directory assis-
tance” Sixth World-style. It enables a decker to find the codes
of LTGs that provide access to the hosts he wants. The opera-
tion also lets him locate commcodes for regular telecom calls.
Modify the target number for the System Test according to
the decker’s stated goal. For example, if all he knows is a com-
pany or individual name—“I’m looking for a Mitsuhama sys-
tem”—apply a +1 modifier to the target number. If his goal is
a bit more specific—“I’m looking for a Mitsuhama public-rela-
tions system”—do not modify the target number. If he has a
definite, specific goal—“I’m looking for the Mitsuhama public-
relations system out of the Mitsu office in Bellevue on LTG
5209”—apply a –1 modifier to the target number.
Once a decker has located an LTG code, he need not
repeat the Locate Access Node operation to find the host in
future—unless its owners change the address, of course.
The Locate Access Node operation is an interrogation
operation.
Locate Decker
Test: Index
Utility: Scanner
Action: Complex
The Locate Decker operation is a two-step process. The
decker makes the standard System Test and then an Open-
ended Sensor Test. The decker locates any other deckers whose
Masking Attributes are equal to or lower than his Sensor Test
results. In addition, he knows if they log off or jack out. If a tar-
geted decker is running a sleaze utility, add its rating to the tar-
geted decker’s Masking Rating to determine if the testing
decker locates the target decker. 
Located deckers may break contact by maneuvering (see
Combat Maneuvers, p. 224). 
Friendly deckers who wish to make their presences known
to each other may do so automatically.
Locate File
Test: Index
Utility: Browse
Action: Complex
The Locate File operation is an interrogation operation that
searches for specific datafiles. To use the operation, the decker
must have some idea of what he is looking for—”valuable
data” is not enough.
If the operation succeeds, the decker knows the system
location of the file.
Locate IC
Test: Index
Utility: Analyze
Action: Complex
The Locate IC operation follows the same rules as the
Locate Decker operation. However, the decker automatically
locates the IC program(s) if his System Test succeeds—he need
not make a Sensor Test. The IC program(s) remains located
unless it maneuvers to evade detection.
Locate Slave
Test: Index
Utility: Browse
Action: Complex
The Locate Slave operation follows the same rules as the
Locate File operation (see Locate File). The operation is used to
determine system addresses for specific remote devices con-
trolled by the host. A vague inquiry would be, “Find all the
security cameras controlled by this computer.” A very specific
inquiry would be, “Find the camera that monitors the eastern
stairwell door on the third floor.”
On the other hand, most hosts are likely to control far
fewer slaves than files, so a decker need achieve only 3 suc-
cesses on his System Test to locate the desired system. After
locating the slave node, a decker can perform operations such
as Edit Slave for that node.
Locate Slave is an interrogation operation.
Logon to Host
Test: Access
Utility: Deception
Action: Complex
The Logon to Host operation simply consists of the stan-
dard System Test. Apply any appropriate modifiers to the test
and remember to begin counting the decker’s security tally
with any successes the host achieves.
The decker will not know the host’s Access Rating until he
takes his first crack at the logon. At that point, the rating will
be all too evident. No need to make it a big secret. 
Once the deckers succeeds at the System Test, the virtual
landscape of the computer becomes visible. If the decker is
accessing a host directly through a work station, his icon may
appear in scenery corresponding to an I/O port. Of course,
with the preponderance of sculpted systems in the Matrix
today, the scene may be something quite unique.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
218 Shadowrun, Third Edition
Gaining access to a host through a remote device means the
decker’s icon enters the host at a slave controller, and access
through the console puts the decker in the heart of the CPU node.
These virtual locations do not affect the decker’s tests, but are
provided as guidelines when describing the scene to the decker.
Once on the host, the decker can perform all of the oper-
ations that take care of biz—analyzing the host and its defens-
es, looking for paydata, fiddling files, the whole bit.
Logon to LTG
Test: Access
Utility: Deception
Action: Complex
The Logon to LTG operation simply consists of the usual
System Test using the Access Rating of the LTG. Remember to
begin counting the decker’s security tally on the grid with any
successes the grid achieves. If the decker loses the test, his
logon attempt fails. The decker can try again, but his security
tally remains on the grid for some time (typically, public LTGs
“remember” unauthorized access attempts for 1D3 x 5 min-
utes). The decker also can switch to a different jackpoint before
his next logon attempt—which means the grid will have to
start a new security tally for him.
Once the decker succeeds in the Success Contest, his icon
appears in the familiar virtual landscape of the LTG. From an
LTG, the decker can log on to the RTG that controls the LTG, or
on to the PLTG attached to this LTG (if he knows its address),
or to any host attached to the LTG (if he knows the host’s
address).
Logon to RTG
Test: Access
Utility: Deception
Action: Complex
Once he has logged on to an LTG, a decker can log on to
its controlling RTG by performing a Logon to RTG operation.
He 
must perform this operation if he wants to connect to a dif-
ferent LTG on the same RTG, or to a different RTG altogether.
To perform the operation, the decker makes a System Test
against the RTG’s Access Rating. Remember that “local”
changes in the LTG system ratings (see p. 202) will not carry
over to the RTG. The gamemaster can assign temporary
changes to the RTG Ratings, of course.
Remember that an RTG maintains the same security tally
for all a decker’s activities on any LTGs it controls, as well as the
RTG itself.
Once the decker is on the RTG, he can perform a Logon to
LTG to reach any LTG attached to the RTG, or a Logon to RTG
operation to reach any other RTG in the world.
Make Comcall
Test: Files
Utility: Commlink
Action: Complex
A decker on an RTG can make a call to any commcode on
an LTG controlled by that RTG by performing a Make Comcall
operation. But this operation is not just a way to beat pay-
phones. The decker can make a call, then move to another RTG
and make a call to a number under its control, then link the two
together. A decker can move to multiple RTGs in this manner,
building a secure conference call. Each call the decker links
together requires another System Test.
Deckers can be licensed to provide this service on various
RTGs. This means they get a passcode from the RTG vendor
that authorizes this operation. In that case, no tests are needed
to make the calls or link them together. This license is usually
restricted to corporate deckers. 
The Tap Comcall operation cannot trace this kind of call,
but another decker could use the track utility to try to locate the
commcodes involved in the call. (See 
Tap Comcall, p. 219, for
further information.)
In addition, the decker can detect any taps or tracers on
the commlines by winning an Opposed Sensor versus Device
Rating Test. He can neutralize them with another Opposed
Test, pitting Evasion against the Device Rating.
Dumping a participant from a comcall requires a Files Test.
Likewise, jumping into a tapped comcall requires a Files Test.
Deckers often arrange secure calls as a profitable sideline.
The typical charge is 100 nuyen per caller per minute.
The Make Comcall operation is a monitored operation.
Monitor Slave
Test: Slave
Utility: Spoof
Action: Simple
This operation enables the decker to read data transmitted
by a remote device. He can listen to signals from audio pick-
ups, watch feeds from security cameras, examine readouts on
a computerized medical scanner hooked up to the host, and so
on. As long as he maintains the operation, he receives constant
updates from the device.
The Monitor Slave operation is a monitored operation.
Null Operation
Test: Control
Utility: Deception
Action: Complex
The gamemaster may require a decker to perform one or
more Null Operations whenever the decker is waiting for some-
thing to happen, whether it is an event on the Matrix, the end of
an ongoing operation, or something else that involves hanging
around in cyberspace without making System Tests. The
gamemaster may also call for a Null Operation if a decker is
doing anything that requires actions but not System Tests, such
as maintaining an Edit Slave
. The gamemaster may secretly per-
form these operations on behalf of the decker, if he so desires.
Use the host’s base Security Value for the Success Contest if
the decker is inactive on the host for less than 10 seconds. If the
period of inactivity is less than a minute but more than 10 sec-
onds, apply a +1 modifier to the Security Value. If the period is
less than an hour but more than a minute, apply a +2 modifier. If
the period is less than 12 hours but more than 1 hour, apply a +4
modifier; apply an additional +1 modifier for every additional 12
hours. The gamemaster may set an upper limit on the inactive
period, depending on the decker’s ability to avoid falling asleep
in the event of such implausibly long times.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
219Shadowrun, Third Edition
Selena begins a download that will complete in 12
seconds. She has nothing else she wants to do, so she
waits. The gamemaster requires a Null Operation and adds
+1 to the host’s Security Value.
On a different run, Selena is waiting for a ground team
to get through a locked door (don’t you just hate those
manual doors with no computer overrides on the lock?).
The gamemaster determines that the maglock penetration
task will take 7 minutes. He also performs a secret Null
Operation for Selena and applies a +2 modifier to the
host’s Security Value for the Success Contest . The test
yields several successes that push the security tally past its
next trigger step, which triggers a truly unpleasant IC pro-
gram. The gamemaster decides to have the IC show up 3
minutes into the waiting period.
If the Security Test raises the decker’s security tally and
triggers a response from the host, the gamemaster should acti-
vate the response as he sees fit, perhaps after a percentage
interval of the decker’s period of inactivity.
Swap Memory
Test: None
Utility: None
Action: Simple
The Swap Memory operation enables a decker to load a new
utility program into his deck’s active memory and then upload it
to his on-line icon.
Loading the utility to active memory is a Simple Action—
the decker simply tells the deck to do it. If his deck does not
have enough active memory to hold the new program, he
must first spend a Free Action to unload a program from his
deck’s active memory. No tests are required for these actions.
Once the utility is in active memory, it automatically starts
uploading to the icon. See
Ongoing Operations, p. 214, for
details on just when the utility will be available to the persona.
Tap Comcall
Test: Special
Utility: Commlink
Action: Complex
The Tap Commcall operation enables deckers to locate
active commcodes on an LTG, trace and tap commcalls.
Deckers use the commlink utility for all the tests required dur-
ing this monitored operation.
To locate active commcodes on an LTG, a decker must be
active on an RTG that controls the LTG. The decker makes an
Index Test to determine if any commcodes on the LTG are
sending or receiving a call. If the decker is checking for a par-
ticular commcode, he must be on that commcode’s parent
RTG, and he receives a –2 target number modifier for the Index
Test. If the decker finds a commcode in use, he can make a
Control Test to trace the call to its origin or destination. If mul-
tiple participants are undertaking a conference call with that
commcode, each net success on the test reveals the comm-
code of one participant.
If the call was set up by another decker using the Make
Comcall operation, then the Control Test locates the decker
controlling the call. The decker trying to trace the call must
move to the RTG the calling decker is currently located in and
use a track utility against him. Note that using the track utility
on a decker is considered an attack and reveals your presence
to that decker. The track utility locates all the other commcodes
involved in the call.
If the decker wants to tap the call and record it in his
deck’s storage memory or off-line storage, he must make a
Files Test. Each minute of recording occupies 1 Mp of storage.
If the comm connection is scrambled, the decker must
decrypt it by making an Opposed Test pitting his Computer
Skill against the Device Rating of the data encryption system on
the comm line. The decrypt utility reduces the decker’s target
number. The number of phones and encryption devices
involved in the call have no effect on the decker’s target num-
ber. If the first decryption test fails, the decker can try again;
apply a +2 modifier to the target number for each additional
test. None of the tests against scrambling affect the decker’s
security tally on the RTG.
If any of the phones involved in the call is equipped with
a dataline scanner, the decker may set that off even if he does-
n’t trigger an alert on the RTG. Dataline scanners (p. 291) have
a rating from 1 to 10. Once the decker establishes his tap, the
decker must make an Opposed Test, Computer Skill versus the
scanner’s Device Rating. The commlink utility reduces the
decker’s target number. If the decker wins, he has synchro-
nized the tiny fluctuations in signal integrity caused by his tap
and fooled the scanner. If multiple dataline scanners are in use
on the call, use the highest rating among them for the test. In
this case, the decker needs 1 success for each scanner
involved, or some of the devices detect the tap (presumably
the more expensive ones). Whether this test succeeds or fails,
the result does not affect the decker’s security tally on the RTG.
Once a decker has tapped and unscrambled a call, he can
listen in and record, as he wishes. When the call terminates, he
can stay locked on to any of the commcodes, either the origi-
nal one that he was after or any that he traced. He can then
attempt to monitor any subsequent calls placed from the
commcode. If the decker is monitoring a code that he has
already tapped, he does not need to make Index Tests to
determine when it becomes active again. He does need to
make new tests to trace or tap the new calls and defeat any
dataline scanners or encryption on the calls.
Deckers may also reveal themselves and enter in tapped
comcalls, or disconnect participants from comcalls by perform-
ing a Make Comcall operation (Files Test, modified by comm-
link utility).
Tap Comcall is a monitored operation.
Upload Data
Test: Files
Utility: Read/Write
Action: Simple
This operation enables a decker to transmit data from his
cyberdeck to the Matrix. This data comes directly from the
deck’s storage memory and does not affect active memory.
If the decker is creating a new file on the host, the file is
written automatically. If the decker intends to modify an exist-
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
220 Shadowrun, Third Edition
ing file on the host—adding false records to a database, for
example—the decker must perform an Edit File operation after
the upload is finished.
Note that the Upload Data operation is not used to upload
utilities. The Swap Memory operation handles that function.
The Upload Data operation is an ongoing operation.
UTILITIES
Theoretically, a sufficiently godlike decker could command
the Matrix with nothing but his bare persona and skill alone.
Less divine netheads, however, must supplement their puny
skills with utility programs. Utilities come in four varieties:
operational, special, offensive, and defensive. Operational util-
ities apply to a decker’s System Tests. These prove especially
useful when performing system operations‚ hence the name
operational utilities. Special utilities perform specific tasks in
the Matrix. Offensive utilities are used to damage opposing
deckers, IC programs, and so on. Defensive utilities are
designed to prevent or reduce damage taken in cybercombat. 
The multiplier value listed in each utility entry is used to
determine program size (see Program Size Table, p. 223). Each
listing also notes any system operations for which the utility
may be used (see 
System Operations, p. 214, for descriptions
and rules for system operations).
Utility programs come in two formats, the original source
code and copies. A decker must have the source code of a pro-
gram to upgrade or modify the program. See 
Source and
Object Code, p. 295.
Unless otherwise noted, utility programs must be pre-
loaded into active memory to work.
OPERATIONAL UTILITIES
Operational utilities help deckers execute system operations,
in the same way that a samurai’s smartlink makes his gun a more
effective tool and his dermal armor backs up his armored jacket.
Operational utilities reduce the target numbers of a decker’s
System Tests by the utility rating (see 
System Tests, p. 209).
Deckers may perform system operations without utilities (see
System Operations,p. 214)—not having the right program does
not make the operation impossible, just more difficult.
Analyze
Multiplier: 3
System Operations: Analyze (Host, IC, Icon, Security,
Subsystem), Locate IC 
The analyze utility reduces the target numbers for System
Tests that identify IC, programs, and other resources or events
controlled by a host.
Browse
Multiplier: 1
System Operations: Locate Access Node, Locate File, Locate
Slave
The browse utility reduces the target numbers of Index
Tests made to locate specific data values or system addresses.
Unlike analyze and scanner utilities, which search for Matrix
activity, the browse utility works on the contents, or real-world
functions, of these data nodes.
Commlink
Multiplier: 1
System Operations: Make Comcall, Tap Comcall
The commlink utility reduces the target numbers of any
tests that affect the decker’s communications link.
Deception
Multiplier: 2
System Operations: Graceful Logoff, Logon to (LTG, RTG, or
Host), Null Operation
Unless otherwise noted, the deception utility may be used
to reduce the target number of all Access Tests.
Decrypt
Multiplier: 1
System Operations: Decrypt Access, Decrypt File, Decrypt
Slave
The decrypt utility reduces the target numbers of any
System Tests made to defeat scramble IC programs.
Read/Write
Multiplier: 2
System Operations: Download Data, Edit File, Upload Data
The read/write utility reduces the decker’s target number
for System Tests necessary to transfer files or otherwise access,
edit, or create data in the Matrix.
Relocate
Multiplier: 2
This utility is used against track utilities in their location
cycle. The decker using relocate engages the tracking decker in
a Success Contest. The relocating decker makes a Computer
Test, with a target number equal to his opponent’s Sensor
Rating minus the Relocate Utility Rating. The tracking decker
makes an MPCP Test against the Relocate Utility Rating. If the
relocating decker wins, the track program fails completely. The
attacker must successfully attack the target decker again before
using the track utility against his opponent.
Scanner
Multiplier: 3
System Operations: Locate Decker
The scanner utility reduces the target numbers of System
Tests made during operations that search for deckers.
Spoof
Multiplier: 3
System Operations: Control Slave, Edit Slave, Monitor Slave
The spoof utility reduces the target numbers for all System
Tests made to affect system and subsystem slaves.
SPECIAL UTILITIES
Special utilities perform specific jobs that fall outside the
standard utilities, such as offensive or operation utilities.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
221Shadowrun, Third Edition
Sleaze
Multiplier: 3
The sleaze utility combines with a deck’s Masking Rating
to enhance the deck’s Detection Factor: (Masking + Sleaze) ÷
2, round up.
Track
Multiplier: 8
The track utility is a trace program used as a combat pro-
gram against hostile deckers. After each successful attack, note
the number of successes the attacking decker scored. The tar-
get decker must make an Evasion (Track Rating) Test. If the
Evasion Test fails to yield an equal or greater number of suc-
cesses, the attacker’s track utility locks onto the target decker’s
datatrail and begins its location cycle. Divide 10 by the attack-
er’s net successes to determine how many turns the track util-
ity needs to locate the target decker’s jackpoint.
For the purposes of measuring the location cycle, only
count full Combat Turns. If a decker can destroy the utility
before the last Initiative Pass of a Combat Turn is completed,
that turn is not considered completed.
The target decker can try to escape the attacking decker by
logging off or jacking out. However, the track utility makes
logoff operations more difficult.
Targeted deckers can use the relocate utility against track
programs (see 
Relocate). Of course, the target decker can
always crash the attacking persona, which
would stop all its pesky programs.
OFFENSIVE UTILITIES
Offensive utilities inflict damage on
the icons of deckers, IC programs, running
programs, datafiles—pretty much any-
thing. Some offensive utilities, such as the
attack utility, are general, brute-force
destructive viral logics. Others are subtler
and more limited. The following descrip-
tions specify the targets each utility pro-
gram can attack.
Attack
Multiplier
Light: 2
Medium: 3
Serious: 4
Deadly: 5
Target: Personas, IC
The attack utility, the least subtle
offensive program, can be programmed
to inflict Light to Deadly damage. It sam-
ples the instruction algorithms of the tar-
geted icons and tries to introduce fairly
coarse memory faults into the icon’s most
frequently accessed code segments. In
cybercombat, that translates to a direct
attack on the Condition Monitor of the
decker’s persona or IC icon.
The attack utility affects on-line
icons only and has no effect on a decker’s
meatbody or cyberdeck. The armor utility reduces the Power of
damage done by attack utilities. 
Black Hammer
Multiplier: 20
Target: Deckers
Five year ago it was a rumor, four years ago a bleeding-
edge weapon on the decks of Lone Star’s GridSec elites. Three
years ago the so-called black hammer utility began cropping
up in shadowy hands and today it is a standard offensive utili-
ty that most deckers take for granted.
The black hammer utility is a black IC program that targets
the decker, not the deck. It can kill a decker without knocking
his cyberdeck off-line, so that the decker’s jackpoint remains
traceable. Black hammer lacks the blaster-like capabilities of
mainframe-driven black IC, but otherwise its effects are identi-
cal to those of lethal black IC (see 
Black IC, p. 230).
Killjoy
Multiplier: 10
Target: Deckers
The killjoy utility mimics non-lethal black IC. Killjoy pro-
grams inflict Stun damage to a decker’s meatbody. Otherwise,
the killjoy utility is identical to the black hammer utility.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
222 Shadowrun, Third Edition
Slow
Multiplier: 4
Target: IC
The slow utility reduces the execution speed of proactive
IC. Whenever a decker attacks IC with the slow utility, make an
Opposed Test, pitting the Security Value against the Slow
Rating. If the IC generates more successes, nothing happens to
it. If the slow achieves more successes, the IC loses 1 action for
every 2 net successes the slow achieved. If the IC has no
actions left in a turn, it hangs—goes dead.
Note that temporarily disabling IC in this manner prevents
the IC from raising the decker’s security tally. However, sup-
pressing the IC requires 1 point of Detection Factor (see
Suppressing IC,p. 212). If the IC is not suppressed at the begin-
ning of the next Combat Turn, the gamemaster rolls Initiative for
the IC per standard rules and the IC resumes where it left off.
Reactive IC is not vulnerable to the slow utility.
DEFENSIVE UTILITIES
Defensive utilities are designed to prevent, reduce, or
repair damage taken in cybercombat. As with offensive utili-
ties, add or subtract the utility rating as indicated in the indi-
vidual descriptions.
Armor
Multiplier: 3
The armor utility reduces the Power of damage inflicted on
a decker’s icon by the Armor Rating. For example, the armor
utility reduces damage caused by killer IC or the attack utility.
Against black IC, armor only reduces the Power of damage
taken by the decker’s icon—not damage taken by the decker’s
meatbody. In short, the armor utility is always effective against
standard damage to the icon’s condition monitor but has no
effect on collateral damage to the decker or his deck, which
must depend on Hardening for protection.
The armor utility loses 1 Rating Point every time the deck-
er takes damage—every time it fails to completely absorb dam-
age from a hit. Deckers can replace degraded armor utilities
with fresh copies of the program by performing the Swap
Memory operation.
Cloak
Multiplier: 3
The cloak utility reduces the target numbers for Evasion Tests
made during combat maneuvers (see Combat Maneuvers, p. 224).
Lock-On
Multiplier: 3
The lock-on utility reduces the target numbers for opposed
Sensor Tests made during combat maneu-
vers (see 
Combat Maneuvers, p. 224).
Medic
Multiplier: 4
The medic utility is used to reduce the
number of filled-in boxes in the on-line
icon’s Condition Monitor. To use the utility,
a decker must spend a Complex Action and
make a Success Test using a number of dice equal to the medic
utility’s rating. The target number is determined by the level of
damage the icon has suffered, as shown on the Medic Target
Numbers Table.
Each success achieved on the Success Test repairs 1
wound on the icon’s Condition Monitor. The program loses 1
Rating Point each time it is used, whether it scores any suc-
cesses or not. Deckers may load a new copy of the medic util-
ity at its full rating by performing a Swap Memory operation.
CYBERCOMBAT
Deckers and IC can engage in cybercombat. Icons repre-
senting system resources and applications cannot attack or be
attacked this way. Deckers may use system operations to
engage these icons.
CYBERCOMBAT SEQUENCE
Cybercombat in the Matrix follows much the same
sequence as standard 
Shadowrun combat. First, the opposing
characters and icons determine Initiative, then declare and
resolve their actions.
Combat Turns in the Matrix are 3 seconds long, the same
as standard 
Shadowrun Combat Turns. (Though 3 seconds is an
endlessly long time in actual computer use, the 3-second turn
enables gamemasters to more easily synchronize Matrix
actions and physical actions elsewhere in the game.) Resolve
any simultaneous actions in an Initiative Pass in the following
order: astral actions, Matrix actions, and physical actions, with
the following exceptions.
If a decker declares a Delayed Action
(p. 103) to wait for something to happen in
the physical world, resolve his action along
with any physical actions of the Initiative
Pass. For example, John has an action avail-
able on 9 of the turn’s fourth Initiative Pass.
He delays his action, waiting for his meat
colleagues to get to a security door. An IC
MEDIC TARGET NUMBERS TABLE
Wound Level Target Number
Light 4
Moderate 5
Serious 6
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
223Shadowrun, Third Edition
program jumps John on 8. The IC program resolves its action
along with other Matrix actions on 8. John can take his delayed
action on 8, but as Matrix actions come before physical actions,
John goes after the IC. So think hard about delaying, net-
heads—combat usually goes to the swiftest.
Deckers who are communicating directly by voice or
datascreen with the meatworld resolve their actions along with
the physical actions of an Initiative Pass as well, even if they
have actions available before that time. This penalty does not
apply to communications via hitcher electrodes, with someone
“along for the ride” on the decker’s own terminal, or to com-
munications with other personas on the system.
INITIATING COMBAT
A decker may initiate combat with any icon that is “visible”
or any icon he has located. Any icon that attacks a decker auto-
matically becomes visible, unless it successfully performs a
combat maneuver to conceal itself (see
Combat Maneuvers).
Deckers may locate reactive IC programs by performing the
appropriate Analyze operations, and they may locate other
deckers by performing Locate Decker operations (see 
System
Operations, p. 214). In addition, other deckers may make them-
selves visible to a decker by communicating with him, attacking
him, or deliberately revealing themselves in some other way.
Once a decker is “visible” or located, he remains so unless he
makes a successful combat maneuver to evade detection.
Proactive IC programs may initiate combat with any deck-
er whose security tally triggers the IC.
The IC program can continue to attack
until the decker gets off the system or
evades detection with a combat
maneuver.
INITIATIVE
Any icons with a Reaction Attribute
roll for Initiative per standard 
SR3 rules
(p. 100).
Decker Initiative
The Initiative of
a decker is based
on the Reaction
Attribute of the
decker’s persona.
If his Reaction
has no enhance-
ments, the deck-
er rolls 1D6 and
adds the result to
his Reaction to
determine
Initiative.
Each level of Re-
sponse Increase
(p. 207) adds 2 to
a decker’s Re-
action and +1D6
to his Initiative.
Wired reflexes,
magical augmentation, vehicle-control rigs, and other
enhancements that increase the Reaction Attribute of a deck-
er’s physical body do not affect Initiative in the Matrix.
Initiative and the Physical World: If a decker is engaged
in direct communication with the physical world via voice,
print, datascreen, and so on, he loses 1D6 of Initiative until he
drops the communications link. This penalty does not apply to
communications with a meathead via hitcher electrodes, nor
does it apply to users with tortoises.
IC Initiative
When calculating the Initiative of an IC program, use the
formulas supplied in the IC Initiative Table.
When IC is triggered in the middle of a Combat Turn, reduce
it’s Initiative by 10 for each Initiative Pass that has completely
passed that turn. The IC will act on its next Initiative Pass. For
example, if IC is triggered by a decker during Initiative Pass 3 (2
passes have completed), and the IC rolls 29 for Initiative, it will go
on 9. Since the decker triggered the IC during his Combat Phase
on 7, the IC won’t get to go until the next Combat Turn (lucky for
the decker).
ACTIONS
An icon may take one Free Action, and either two Simple
Actions or one Complex Action during a Combat Phase. 
Besides the actions listed here, deckers may perform sys-
tem operations (See 
System Operations, p. 214). Deckers must
perform specific actions to execute
each operation.
Free Actions
Free Actions are simple, almost
automatic actions that require hardly
any effort to complete.
The following system operations
are Free Actions: Analyze IC, Analyze
Icon.
PROGRAM SIZE TABLE
Program Multiplier
Rating 1 2 3 4 56789 1 0
1 123456789 1 0
2 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40
3 9 1 82 73 64 55 46 37 28 19 0
4 16 32 48 64 80 96 112 128 144 160
5 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
6 36 72 108 144 180 216 252 288 324 360
7 49 98 147 196 245 294 343 392 441 490
8 64 128 192 256 320 384 448 512 576 640
9 81 162 243 324 405 486 567 648 729 810
10 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1.000
11 121 242 363 484 605 726 847 968 1,089 1,210
12 144 288 432 576 720 864 1,008 1,152 1,296 1,440
13 169 338 507 676 845 1,014 1,183 1,352 1,521 1,690
14 196 392 588 784 980 1,176 1,372 1,568 1,764 1,960
IC INITIATIVE TABLE
Host Security Code Initiative
Blue 1D6 + IC Rating
Green 2D6 + IC Rating
Orange 3D6 + IC Rating
Red 4D6 + IC Rating
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
224 Shadowrun, Third Edition
Delay Action: Deckers may delay actions per standard
SR3 rules (see p. 103). See Cybercombat Sequence, p. 222, for
rules on resolving delayed actions.
Jack Out: A decker can jack out of the Matrix anytime as a
Free Action, unless she has been attacked and successfully hit by
Black IC (see 
Black IC, p. 230). If the decker has not performed a
Graceful Logoff operation before jacking out, she is susceptible to
dump shock (see 
Dump Shock,p. 227).
Speak a Word: Standard SR3 rules apply for verbal com-
munications (see p. 106). Direct communications with charac-
ters in the physical world affect the decker’s Initiative as noted
in 
Initiative. 
Deckers may also “buffer” messages. When buffering a
message, the decker may write a message up to 100 words
long and give it to any character linked to the decker with
hitcher electrodes, radiolink, datascreen, or other device. The
second character may also operate an icon the decker can
“see.” The second character receives the buffered message at
the end of the Combat Turn.
Terminate Download/Upload: A decker can suspend or
terminate a data transmission at any time.
Unload Program: The decker can remove a program from
his deck’s active memory at any time. Removing a program
releases active memory for a Swap Memory operation.
Unsuppress IC: A decker can release IC from suppression
and restore the points being used to suppress the IC to his
Detection Factor at any time. If the suppression was keeping
crashed IC from increasing the decker’s security tally, the tally
increases immediately. If the suppression was suspending the
IC’s actions, it becomes active immediately. (See 
Suppressing
IC, p. 212.)
Simple Actions
A Simple Action requires a bit more concentration to per-
form than a Free Action, and may be slightly more complex.
The following system operations are Simple
Actions: Analyze Security, Analyze Subsystem, Decrypt
Access, Decrypt File, Decrypt Slave, Download Data,
Edit File, Monitor Slave, Swap Memory, Upload Data.
Attack: A decker may attack an icon with any
offensive utility loaded in his deck. IC programs and
other icons may attack according to their programming.
Combat Maneuvers: Deckers and icons may
engage in any listed combat maneuvers as a Simple
Action (see 
Combat Maneuvers.
Complex Actions
Performing a Complex Action requires intense con-
centration on only that task. Certain System Operations
require a complex action, as well as attempting to jack
out after having been attacked by Black IC (see 
Black IC,
p. 230).
The following system operations are Complex
Actions: Analyze Host, Control Slave, Edit Slave,
Graceful Logoff, Locate Access Node, Locate Decker,
Locate File, Locate IC, Locate Slave, Logon to Host,
Logon to LTG, Logon to RTG, Make Comcall, Null
Operation, Tap Comcall.
COMBAT MANEUVERS
Deckers, proactive IC, and any other self-directed icons
can perform combat maneuvers to avoid detection, parry
attacks, or gain a position to make more accurate attacks. All
combat maneuvers are Simple Actions.
Each combat maneuver requires an Opposed Test
between the icon performing the maneuver and the icon
opposing the maneuver. The maneuvering icon pits its Evasion
against the opposing icons Sensor Rating. If either icon is an IC
program, substitute Security Value for the Attribute. (Non-IC
programs that lack Evasion Attributes cannot perform combat
maneuvers, nor can non-IC programs that lack Sensor
Attributes oppose them—although if the maneuvering icon
achieves no successes, it still fails.)
If the maneuvering icon achieves more successes, note the
net successes—the number of successes that exceed the oppos-
ing test successes. The net successes determine how successful-
ly the icon maneuvered. If the opposing icon achieved an equal
or greater number of successes, the combat maneuver fails.
If the maneuvering icon has a cloak utility, reduce that
icon’s target number by the Utility Rating. If the opposing
icon has a lock-on utility, reduce its target number by the
Utility Rating.
Hacking Pool can be added to these tests.
Evade Detection
An icon may perform an evade-detection maneuver to
evade an opposing icon that has detected it.
A decker must use the Locate IC operation to re-detect an
IC program that has evaded him with the maneuver. To re-
detect personas that have evaded him, a decker must use a
Locate Decker operation.
IC programs re-detect evading icons in a number of
Combat Turns equal to the net successes of the icon’s Evasion
CYBERCOMBAT TARGET NUMBERS TABLE
Host Target Number to Hit Target Number to Hit
Security Code Intruding Icon Legitimate Icon
Blue 6 3
Green 5 4
Orange 4 5
Red 3 6
IC DAMAGE TABLE
Host Security Code IC Damage Level
Blue Moderate
Green Moderate
Orange Serious
Red Serious
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
225Shadowrun, Third Edition
Test. This time is shortened by 1 turn for each point added to
the icon’s security tally during the period. The IC program
shows up at the end of the last turn of the evasion period,
ready for the Initiative step in the next Combat Turn.
Cybersushi is on an Orange-8 host when he comes
under attack from a killer IC program. He needs a breather
to upload a more powerful attack program, so he attempts
an evasion maneuver.
First, Sushi makes his Evasion Test against the host’s
Security Value. He has an Evasion Attribute of 6, so he rolls
6D6. He also has a Cloak-4 utility, so the target number for
the test is 4 (host Security Value – Cloak Rating). Sushi
achieves 3 successes. Meanwhile, the gamemaster makes
a Security Test for the host against Sushi’s Evasion Rating.
He rolls 8D6 against a Target Number 6 and achieves 1
success.
That makes Sushi the winner of the test with 2 net suc-
cesses. As a result, he evades the killer IC program for 2
Combat Turns.
However, the host spots Cybersushi during the next
turn as the decker runs a Swap Memory operation. His
security tally rises 2 points, which wipes out his evasion
period—the killer IC program re-detects him at the end of
the turn.
Parry Attack
The parry-attack maneuver enables the maneuvering icon
to enhance its defenses in cybercombat. If the maneuvering
icon wins the Success Contest, increase target numbers for
attacks against the icon by its net successes on the test.
The bonus lasts until the next attack by the opposing icon.
If the opposing icon performs a position-attack maneuver (see
below), the maneuvering icon retains the parry bonus. If either
icon successfully performs an evade-detection maneuver, the
bonus is lost.
Position Attack
The position-attack maneuver enables an icon to position
itself for an attack on an opponent. This is a dangerous maneu-
ver that may backfire on an icon. If the maneuvering icon wins
the Success Contest, the icon may reduce the target number
for its next attack by its net successes or increase the Power of
its attack by the net successes. If the opposing icon wins the
Success Contest, that icon receives the bonus.
The bonus lasts only until the next attack.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
226 Shadowrun, Third Edition
Cybersushi has an Evasion Attribute of 6 and is running
a Cloak-2 utility when he runs into a corp decker with a
Sensor Attribute of 5 and a Lock-On-3 utility. Sushi tries a
position-attack maneuver to get the jump on his oppo-
nent. He makes an Evasion Test against a Target Number
3 (opposing icon’s Sensor Rating – Sushi’s Cloak Rating).
His opponent makes a Sensor Test against a Target
Number 3 (Sushi’s Evasion Rating – opposing icon’s Lock-
On Rating). Sushi achieves 4 successes on his test, but his
opponent achieves 5. As a result, the corp decker may
decrease the target number of his next attack against Sushi
by 1 or increase the Power of his attack by 1.
Sushi uses his remaining Simple Action in the phase to
perform a parry-attack maneuver. The tests are the same,
but this time Sushi wins, with a net success of 1. That
increases the target number of the corp decker’s attack by
1. The corp decker decides to accept the increased target
number and applies his position-attack bonus to the Power
of his attack.
RESOLVING ATTACKS
All cybercombat attacks are Simple Actions. To make an
attack, the attacker makes a test with his offensive utility pro-
gram. (Hacking Pool dice may be used to augment the pro-
gram.) The target number for the test depends on two factors:
the target icon’s status—
Legitimate or Intruding—and the
Security Code of the host where the attack occurs. Any decker
icon or IC program that has logged onto a system with a valid
passcode is considered Legitimate. All other icons are
Intruding. The Cybercombat Target Numbers Table provides
target numbers for icons based on these factors.
Apply any appropriate target-number modifiers from util-
ity options, maneuvers, damage, and so on.
If a decker has somehow acquired a Legitimate passcode,
or previously planted one on the host, he may log in using it.
In general, if the decker uses that passcode to take advantage
of Legitimate status during a fight with the host’s own security
programs, the host devalidates the passcode when the decker
jacks out or logs off. He has
blown his cover, so to speak.
However, he can use the
passcode in combat against
Intruding deckers without
blowing his cover.
Record the number of
successes scored on the
Attack Test, because they
determine the effects of the
attack. The various types of
offensive utilities have differ-
ent effects on their targets,
but most inflict damage on a
decker’s physical body. Any
special effects and tests made
by the targeted icon are
noted in the offensive utility
descriptions (see 
Offensive
Utilities, p. 221). For offensive utilities that do not inflict special
damage, see Icon Damage, below.
Icon Damage
Many programs, such as attack and killer IC programs,
inflict damage per standard Shadowrun rules. Each of these
programs has a Damage Code, which consists of a numeric
Power and a Damage Level: Light, Moderate, Serious, or
Deadly. The Power for such programs is equal to their ratings.
The Damage Level for such IC programs is determined by
the host’s Security Code, as shown on the IC Damage Table.
The icon that has been hit rolls a Damage Resistance Test
using its Bod Rating against a target number equal to the
Power of the damage. For IC programs that take damage, make
a Damage Resistance Test using the host’s Security Value. The
armor utility reduces the Power for the test.
Compare the attacker and defender’s successes. If the
attacker achieved more, for every 2 net successes stage up by
1 level the Damage Level of the attack. If the defender
achieved more, stage down the Damage Level by 1 level for
every 2 net successes.
Cassie is attacked by a Killer-6 program on an Orange
host, so she faces 6S damage. The IC achieves 3 success-
es on its Attack Test. Cassie is running an Armor-4 utility,
which reduces the Power of the attack to 2. Cassie makes
a Bod (2) Test and achieves 4 successes. She achieved
only 1 net success, so the damage is not staged down,
and her persona takes Serious damage."
Condition Monitors
All icons use the standard Shadowrun Condition Monitor
(see p. 125), although they use only one damage track—there is
no Stun damage done to icons. Damaged icons suffer target
number modifiers as indicated on the Condition Monitor. If all 10
boxes on an icon’s Condition Monitor are filled, the icon crash-
es. If the icon is a persona, the persona’s decker is dumped from
the Matrix. The decker is vulnerable to dump shock (see 
Dump
Shock, below) and possibly
other effects (when black IC
kills an icon, it does not dis-
connect the decker—it just
makes it easier to fry his brain).
Simsense Overload
Whenever a decker’s icon
takes damage from white or
gray IC, the decker’s physical
body may suffer Stun damage
through a resonance effect
over the ASIST interface.
To determine whether
the decker takes simsense
overload damage, he makes a
Willpower Test against a tar-
get number based on the
damage taken by his icon.
These target numbers are pro-
OVERLOAD DAMAGE TARGET NUMBERS
Icon Damage Level Target Number
Light 2
Moderate 3
Serious 5
DUMP SHOCK DAMAGE LEVELS
Host Security Code Damage Level
Blue Light
Green Moderate
Orange Serious
Red Deadly
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
227Shadowrun, Third Edition
vided in the Overload Damage Target
Numbers table. Any icon that takes
Deadly damage crashes automatically and
exposes the decker to dump shock.
If the Willpower Test fails, the decker
suffers a Light Stun wound and fills in 1
box on his Mental Condition Monitor.
Simsense overload damage is not an
issue when dealing with black IC. Any dam-
age the decker suffers in that case is no side
effect!
Dump Shock
When a decker is crashed off the
Matrix or jacks out without performing a
Graceful Logoff operation, he risks Stun
damage from dump shock. The Power of
the damage equals the host’s Security
Value. This measures the shock of the sud-
den transition from virtual to physical
reality. The Damage Level is determined
by the host’s Security Code, as shown on
the Dump Shock Damage Levels table.
INTRUSION 
COUNTERMEASURES
The following section details various
forms of white, gray, and black IC and
their specific effects. For information on
how IC comes into play, see 
Triggering IC,
p. 212.
WHITE IC
White IC affects only the decker’s on-
line icon. It attacks the icon’s ratings but
does not affect the cyberdeck’s perma-
nent ratings or utilities. The worst that
white IC can do is dump a decker or
scramble data she is trying to read or
write. 
Cripplers
Cripplers are proactive white IC pro-
grams that each attack one of the decker’s
icon’s Attributes. Cripplers come in four
types: acid, binder, jammer, or marker
programs. Acid cripplers attack an icon’s
Bod Rating. Binder cripplers attack an
icon’s Evasion Rating. Jammer cripplers
attack the Sensor Rating, and marker crip-
plers attack the Masking Rating.
Whenever a crippler program attacks
an icon, they engage in a Success
Contest. The gamemaster makes an
Attack Test for the host and tallies the suc-
cesses (see 
Cybercombat, p. 222, for
details on Attack Tests). At the same time,
the decker makes a test using the affect-
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
228 Shadowrun, Third Edition
ed icon Attribute against a target number equal to the crippler
IC’s Rating. If the decker achieves a greater or equal number of
successes, the IC does no damage. Reduce the affected icon
attribute by 1 point for every 2 net successes the IC scores. Yes,
that means 1 net success for the IC does no damage. Two suc-
cesses do 1 point of damage, four successes do 2 points, and
so on.
Neither Armor nor Hardening (see pp. 222 and 206) pro-
tect against cripplers.
Crippler IC cannot reduce an icon Attribute below 1.
Selena is on an Orange-6 system when she’s attacked
by Acid-4 crippler IC. The gamemaster makes an Attack
Test for the IC and achieves 4 successes.
Selena’s icon has a Bod Rating 6, so she rolls 6 dice
when she makes her Bod (4) Test to resist the IC. Selena
scores 2 successes—2 fewer successes than the acid IC. As
a result, Selena’s Bod Rating drops to 5.
Killer
Killer IC is proactive IC that causes damage to icons in
cybercombat. All killer IC has a Damage Code and its Power is
equal to its IC Rating. The Damage Level of killer IC is based on
the host’s security code. Killer IC on Blue or Green systems
does Medium damage; killer IC on Orange and Red systems
does Serious damage. For example, Killer-6 IC on an Orange
host would do 6S damage. This damage rises a stage for every
2 successes achieved on the host’s Attack Test, just like dam-
age in standard combat.
If an attack from killer IC fills the Condition Monitor of a
decker, the decker is dumped. Armor utility programs (p. 222)
reduce damage from killer IC.
Probe
Probe IC is reactive IC that conducts additional interroga-
tions of data packets and program requests for computer
resources. Probe IC helps detect any operations performed by
unauthorized programs.
For a probe-equipped system, the gamemaster makes a
Probe Test using its probe IC Rating against a decker’s
Detection Factor every time the decker makes a System Test.
Add any successes from the Probe Test to the decker’s securi-
ty tally.
Scramble
Scramble IC is reactive IC used to protect elements of a
host’s Access, Files, or Slave subsystems. Scramble IC can be
programmed to protect a specific component of a subsystem
or the entire subsystem. For example, scramble IC can protect
an individual data file, a datastore, or all the Files functions on
a host—including faxprinter output and dedicated terminals.
Similarly, scramble IC on an Access subsystem can oppose
logons from specific entry points, such as public grids and ded-
icated workstations, or all logons. On a Slave subsystem,
scramble IC can defend specific remote devices or all devices
connected to the subsystem.
Scramble IC programs are designed to make it impossible
to Access any host or slave devices they protect, unless it is
decrypted. Additionally, scramble IC will destroy the data
under its care rather than letting it fall into unauthorized hands.
If the decker tries to decrypt scramble IC and fails, the
gamemaster makes a Scramble Test using its Rating against a
target number equal to the decker’s Computer Skill. If the test
fails, the decker has managed to suppress the scramble IC’s
destruct code. If the test succeeds, the data is destroyed.
Deckers may use specific system operations to defeat
scramble IC, all of which can be augmented by the decryption
utility program (see 
System Operations, p. 214). Decrypting
scramble IC does not add to the decker’s security tally. Deckers
can use attack programs to crash scramble IC, but doing so will
increase the decker’s security tally unless he suppresses the
scramble IC.
Tar Baby
Tar baby is reactive IC that attempts to crash deckers’ utility
programs. Each tar baby is pre-programmed to target a specific
type of utility (operational, offensive, defensive, special), deter-
mined by the gamemaster. Tar baby IC does not attack com-
pletely passive utilities such as armor and sleaze programs.
Whenever a decker uses one of the trigger utilities, the
gamemaster makes an Opposed Test between the two pro-
grams’ ratings. Make the Tar Baby Test against a target number
equal to the utility program’s rating. Make the Utility Test
against a target number equal to the tar baby IC’s Rating.
If the tar baby wins the Opposed Test, it crashes both
itself 
and the utility program. Tar baby IC does not increase the
decker’s security tally when it crashes this way. The decker has
to load a fresh copy of the utility program with a Swap
Memory operation.
If the utility wins the Opposed Test, it remains safe and the
gamemaster makes a secret Sensor Test to determine if the deck-
er notices the tar baby IC (see 
Noticing Triggered IC,p. 209).
Selena is on a run when she performs a system opera-
tion using Analyze-6. The utility triggers a Tar Baby-8 pro-
gram that makes a grab at the utility. The gamemaster
makes a Tar Baby (6) Test for the IC and an Analyze (8) Test
for the analyze program. The Tar Baby Test achieves more
net successes, and so both the IC and the utility crash.
GRAY IC
Gray IC programs attack a decker’s cyberdeck and utilities
directly. Any damage caused by a gray IC attack permanently
affects the deck’s ratings. Damaged chips and other compo-
nents must be replaced to restore the deck’s original ratings.
Blaster
Blaster IC is proactive IC that attacks in cybercombat in the
same manner as killer IC (see 
Killer IC, above). Armor reduces
damage from blaster attacks. 
Additionally, blaster IC may permanently damage a deck-
er’s MPCP if it crashes his icon. If blaster IC dumps a decker, make
a Blaster Test using its Rating against a target number equal to
the deck’s MPCP Rating. Hardening increases the target number
but armor has no effect. Reduce the MPCP Rating by 1 point for
every 2 successes on the Blaster Test. Note that the decker may
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
229Shadowrun, Third Edition
need to crank down his persona programs if his deck
takes damage, because their total ratings may not
exceed the deck’s MPCP Rating multiplied by 3 (see
Cyberdecks, p. 206).
It’s not Selena’s day. The program that blew her
off the Matrix wasn’t just killer as she’d hoped—it
was a Blaster-6 program.
Selena’s deck has MPCP-6 and Hardening-2, so
the gamemaster makes a Blaster (8) Test. The test
produces two successes, so Selena’s MPCP Rating is
permanently reduced to 5. If she goes on a run
before replacing it, she’ll have to adjust her persona
programs to make sure their total ratings don’t
exceed 15.
Rippers
Ripper IC is a gray version of crippler IC. This
proactive IC attacks in the same manner (see Cripplers,
p. 227). In addition, whenever a ripper program
reduces an icon Attribute to zero, make a Ripper Test
using its rating against a target number equal to the
deck’s MPCP Rating (Hardening increases the target
number). For every 2 successes on this test, reduce the
rating of the MPCP by 1. Replacing the MPCP is the
only way to restore this damage.
Four different types of ripper IC exist: acid-rip, bind-
rip, jam-rip, and mark-rip. Acid-rip, also known as “bod-
stripper,” “sizzler,” or “peeler,” attacks the deck’s Bod
Rating. Bind-rip, also known as “gluefoot,” “mummy,” or
“flypaper,” attacks the Evasion Rating. Jam-rip, also
known as “blinder,” “gouger,” or “stick,” attacks the
Sensor Rating. Mark-rip, also called “screamer,” “paint,”
or “tag,” attacks the Masking Rating.
Sparky
The proactive IC called sparky IC attacks in the same
manner as Killer IC (see
Killer IC, p. 228). However, if
sparky IC crashes the persona, it causes an overload in
the deck’s power supply that feeds random jolts of elec-
tricity to the MPCP and the decker’s brain. Results can
range from a little impromptu electroshock therapy to a
killing jolt. This is dark gray IC indeed—bordering on black—but
because it is not designed to 
deliberatelycause physical trauma,
it is technically considered non-lethal.
Whenever sparky IC crashes a persona, make a Sparky Test
against a target number equal to the deck’s MPCP Rating + 2.
Hardening increases the target number. Reduce the MPCP
Rating by 1 point for every 2 successes of the Sparky Test. A
sparky attack also causes (IC Rating)M damage to the decker.
Stage the Damage up one level for every 2 successes on the
Sparky Test. The decker resists this damage as he would any
other. Hardening reduces the Power of the damage.
HeadCrash gets trashed off the nets by a Sparky-8 pro-
gram. The Sparky Test yields 2 successes. That melts 1
point off the MPCP right away. It also raises the Damage
Level to HeadCrash from 8M to 8S. Head’s meatbod has a
Body Rating 4 and his deck has Hardening-1. He rolls a
Damage Resistance Test: 4 dice (his Body) against a target
number of 7 (Sparky Rating of 8 – 1 for Hardening). His
test produces 1 success, which does not stage down the
damage. Can you say ZAP?!
Tar Pit
The reactive IC known as tar pit IC operates and attacks in
the same manner as tar baby IC (see Tar Baby, p. 228).
However, if tar pit IC trashes a utility on-line, it also injects the
deck with viral code that corrupts 
all copies of the program in
the deck’s active and storage memories. Unless the decker has
a backup copy of the utility stashed in off-line memory, he’s
lost it for good. And even if he has a backup, he can’t get at it
for the rest of the run.
When tar pit IC trashes a program, make a Tar Pit Test
against a target number equal to the deck’s MPCP Rating.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
230 Shadowrun, Third Edition
Hardening increases the target number. If the test produces no
successes, the viral code is defeated and the tar pit IC has the
same effect as the tar baby program, so the decker can reload
his utility with a Swap Memory operation. If the Tar Pit Test pro-
duces any successes, however, the IC corrupts all copies of the
program stored on the deck. The decker cannot get the utility
back until he jacks out and reloads the utility from a source out-
side his deck (from a storage chip, most likely).
BLACK IC
Black IC is a form of proactive IC that samples the com-
mand transactions between the decker and his deck and then
injects dangerous biofeedback responses into the deck’s ASIST
interface. These feedback responses raise the deck’s simsense
signal to the same levels as a BTL chip on overdose intensity.
As a result, the signal may overload the decker’s neural con-
nections and in turn render him unconscious, trigger psycho-
logical disorders, brainwash him, or cause death from stroke,
heart failure, respiratory paralysis, aneurysm, or neurotransmit-
ter autotoxicity. And those are just a few of the possible effects.
Black IC in Combat
Black IC begins to subvert the ASIST interface in a decker’s
cyberdeck as soon as it scores a successful attack on the deck-
er, even if the hit does no damage. Until the IC scores that first
attack, jacking out of the Matrix is a Free Action.
After a black IC hit, the decker must spend a Complex
Action and make a successful Willpower (Black IC Rating) Test
to jack out. If the test succeeds, the decker may jack out, but
the black IC makes one more cybercombat attack against him
before the connection goes down. Black IC also makes an auto-
matic attack if a companion at the jackpoint pulls the plug
when the deck indicates black IC activity.
Lethal Black IC
Lethal black IC fights like killer IC in cybercombat.
However, successful lethal black IC attacks cause damage to a
decker and his icon. The Damage Code for the IC depends on
the Security Code of the Host: (IC Rating) Moderate for Blue
and Green systems, (IC Rating) Serious for Orange and Red
ones. The Damage Code applies to damage to both the decker
and his icon.
Stage up the Damage Level for every 2 successes on the IC’s
Attack Test. Every time black IC hits a decker, the decker rolls two
Resistance Tests. Hardening reduces the Power of the damage for
these Resistance Tests. A Body Resistance Test, using his Body
Attribute, enables the decker to resist damage to his person. The
Hacking Pool may not be used for this test, though Karma Pool
dice may be. The decker also makes a Resistance Test using his
icon’s Bod Rating to resist damage to the icon. The icon resists
damage as it resists damage from killer IC (see 
Killer, p. 228), and
armor protects the icon normally.
The decker’s Matrix connection remains intact if the icon is
killed before the decker dies or manages to jack out. In such
cases, the IC completely dominates the decker’s icon band-
width. Increase the effective rating of the IC by 2. Of course,
the decker cannot fight back at all with his icon down. All he
can do is try to jack out before the IC kills him.
The Matrix connection automatically goes down if black IC
kills the decker. But before it turns the deck loose, the black IC
gets a shot at the MPCP, making the attack as if it were blaster IC,
with 
double its rating. If the black IC completely destroys the
MPCP, the IC deletes all data downloaded by the decker during
the run. It deletes any such data stored in any connected storage
memory as well, and reduces the MPCP’s Rating to 0.
Permanent Effects: Lethal black IC damage overflows in
the same manner as Physical damage to a 
Shadowrun charac-
ter. Any Deadly wound may produce permanent aftereffects
(see p. 127). Overflow damage from lethal black IC represents
increased levels of brain damage. In addition to permanent
damage, these aftereffects may include neurological damage
that produces memory lapses, hallucinations, tremors, phan-
tom pain, migraines, or similar conditions. In the case of neu-
rological damage, the gamemaster may devise his own rules
for the long-term effects. However, if the decker can be
revived, all the rules for Deadly damage apply.
Cybersushi, who has Body-4 and Hardening-1, is rum-
maging around a Red-8 system when he runs into a black
IC-10 program. The IC attacks him and hits, scoring 2 suc-
cesses on its Attack Test. We won’t worry about what hap-
pens to the icon—Cybersushi has enough troubles of his
own.
The 2 successes stage up the Damage Level from
Serious (S) to Deadly (D). Cybersushi takes a 10D hit from
the IC! His Hardening reduces the Power of the damage to
9. With only 4 Body dice, Cybersushi is not thrilled by this
benefit. He adds 4 Karma Pool dice to the Body dice for
the Resistance Test and achieves 2 successes, which stage
down the Damage Level to Serious. Close call.
Cybersushi fills in 6 boxes on his Physical Condition
Monitor. Meanwhile, the IC rips his icon into junk logics
and takes complete control of his icon bandwidth.
On its next action, the IC whacks Cybersushi again.
Now his icon is down, so the IC’s Rating is up 2 points, to
a 12! It scores 1 success this time, so Cybersushi has to
resist 12S damage, which his Hardening-1 reduces to 11S.
Good luck, Soosh.
Non-Lethal Black IC
Non-lethal black IC functions in the same manner as lethal
black IC, with the following exceptions. First, non-lethal black
IC causes Mental, not Physical damage. Deckers resist such
damage with Willpower Tests. If damage from non-lethal black
IC renders a decker unconscious, the decker’s Matrix connec-
tion is automatically broken. However, the non-lethal black IC
still gets a final shot at the cyberdeck’s MPCP and the data
downloaded during the run.
Mental damage done by non-lethal black IC can overflow
into the Physical Condition Monitor.
Gavin Lowry (order #24266)
64.90.193.6
